THEN WEDNESDAY, APRIL 20, 20 22
ELECTRONIC BEATING OF THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
MEETING TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION THIS MEETING IS
BEING HELD ELECTRONICALLY TO
PROTECT PUBLIC HEALTH AND
SAFETY WILL CONDUCT MEETING
SIMILARLY TO AN IN-PERSON
MEETING.
PUBLIC COMMENT WILL BE BY
TELEPHONE OR ZOOME.
SO THIS IS FOR REAL THIS TIME,
RIGHT THAT ZOOME PEOPLE CAN
JOIN THE MEETING BY ASSUME
AWESOME SO TO SPEAK DURING ANY
OF THE PUBLIC COMMENT
OPPORTUNITIES.
PLEASE CALL TWO ZERO SIX THREE
THREE SEVEN NINE SEVEN TWO
THREE AND ENTER MEETING ID
NUMBER NINE SIX ZERO TWO TO
THREE TO EIGHT TO ZERO ZERO OR
YOU CAN JOIN VIA THE ZOOMLION.
THIS INFORMATION IS ALSO IN THE
PUBLISHED AGENDA AND OTHER
PLACES A CITY WEBSITE NOW GOING
TO ASK RAYMOND TO CALL THE ROLL
VERY GOOD.
ALL RIGHT, COMMISSIONER
BOATBUILDERS BRAHMA CALLING IN
FROM ANN ARBOR AND YES, AGAIN,
THANK YOU FOR THE REMINDER TO
INDICATE WHERE YOU ARE CALLING
IN FROM.
SO THANK YOU FOR THAT.
>> COMMISSIONER BOLLON, YOU'RE
CALLING IN FROM ANN ARBOR
COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGS HERE IN
ANN ARBOR.
>> BRABIN HERE FROM ANN ARBOR
MISSIONER HOW TOMOKI HERE FROM
ANN ARBOR MISSIONER HOME HERE
FROM COLLEGE PARK, MARYLAND
MISSIONER KLEINERMAN HERE FROM
ANN ARBOR, COMMISSIONER LEE
MISSIONER SMITH HERE FROM
WEBSTER TOWNSHIP, MICHIGAN.
>> COMMISSIONER SUMMERS,
INFORMATION ON YOU AND
COMMISSIONER ONE IN COFFS
HARBOR COMMISSIONER HAS TO HEAR
FROM ANN ARBOR COMMISSIONER
HUTCHINSON HERE FROM ANN ARBOR
,LIEUTENANT MIKE SCHERBA
REMOTELY FROM TYRONNE TOWNSHIP
.
>> VERY GOOD MOLLY.
WE DO HAVE QUORUM.
GREAT.
THANK YOU.
SO BEFORE WE LAUNCH THE MEETING
I SO I WANTED TO TRY SOMETHING
OK COMMISSIONER COMMISSIONER,
DID YOU NOT GET CALLED?
I DON'T THINK SO.
I JUST JOINED SO I DON'T KNOW I
DIDN'T HEAR MYSELF BUT HELLO
I'M HERE FROM ANN ARBOR.
YES.
THANK YOU SO OK.
RIGHT SO I WAS GOING TO SAY
THAT WE'RE GOING TO TRY
SOMETHING A LITTLE DIFFERENT
WHICH IS I NOTICED THAT SOME
OTHER COMMISSIONS THEY JUST
CALL EVERYBODY BY FIRST NAMES
AND IT FELT TO ME LIKE A SORT
OF MORE APPROACHABLE, FRIENDLY
WAY TO SORT OF CONDUCT MEETINGS
.
AND SO I WOULD LIKE TO TRY JUST
USING FIRST NAMES THIS THE SORT
OF CONVENTION OF USING
COMMISSIONER WHOEVER WAS
EXISTED ON THE COMMISSION WHEN
I JOINED AND SO I WAS RELUCTANT
TO CHANGE IT.
BUT I THINK WE'RE GOING TO
WE'RE GOING TO GO FOR IT.
SO WE'RE GOING TO TRY FIRST
NAMES TONIGHT IF WE HATE IT,
LET YOU KNOW WE CAN GO BACK TO
FORMALITIES.
BUT SO THAT'S I JUST WANTED TO
BE EXPLICIT ABOUT THAT BECAUSE
IT WAS LIKE ONE OF THOSE
CONVENTIONS I SORT OF HAD TO
ADAPT TO WHEN I JOINED IN
ANYWAY.
SO WE'RE GOING TO TRY FIRST
NAMES, SEE HOW IT FEELS NOW
MOVING INTO THE CONSENT AGENDA.
ARE THERE ANY MODIFICATIONS TO
THE CONSENT AGENDA?
OK, SO IS THERE A MOTION TO
APPROVE THE CONSENT AGENDA AS
PRESENTED?
AWESOME.
I SEE MEGHAN AND I NEED A
SECOND.
I'LL TAKE THAT FROM BRETT.
I HAVE TO NOW BREAK A HABIT
OF DOING COMMISSIONER SO-AND-SO
OK ALL THOSE IN FAVOR PLEASE
PHYSICALLY RAISE YOUR HAND.
ALL THOSE OPPOSED ANY
ABSTENTIONS.
OK AGENDA PASSES NOW WE'RE
GOING TO MOVE IN TO PUBLIC
COMMENT.
SO THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PEOPLE TO SPEAK TO THE
COMMISSION FOR UP TO THREE
MINUTES.
AGAIN, IF YOU'D LIKE TO SPEAK
TO THE COMMISSION PLEASE CALL
TO ZERO SIX THREE THREE SEVEN
NINE SEVEN TWO THREE AND ENTER
MEETING I'D NUMBER NINE SIX
ZERO TWO TWO THREE TWO EIGHT
TWO ZERO ZERO OR CONNECTIVES I
ASSUME ZOOM AS DESCRIBED ON THE
AGENDA CITY STAFF WILL SELECT
CALLERS THAT HAVE RAISED THEIR
HAND ONE BY ONE USING THE LAST
THREE DIGITS OF YOUR PHONE
NUMBER OR YOUR ZOOM ID IN ORDER
TO RAISE YOUR HAND PLEASE PRESS
STAR NINE ON YOUR PHONE OR
SELECT THE RAISED HAND BUTTON
IN ZOOM YOU'LL HEAR AN
AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THE
HOST IS ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK.
RAYMOND, DO WE HAVE ANY CALLERS
?
>> WE DO NOT AT THIS TIME I WAS
EXPECTING AT LEAST ONE THERE
WAS YOU MAY HAVE SEEN IN THE
COMMUNICATIONS THAT SOMEONE WAS
WANTING TO SPEAK TO I THINK THE
THE SWIFT ROUNDABOUT AND SOME
OF THAT THAT CAME OUT LOWER
HOMESTUDY SO THAT OK, LET'S
HAVE SOMEONE THAT JUST JOINED
IF SOMEONE IF ONE OF OUR ZOUMA
FOLKS WHO JUST JOINED WOULD
LIKE TO SPEAK WE ARE IN PUBLIC
COMMENT.
PLEASE FEEL FREE TO RAISE YOUR
HAND AND RESUME FUNCTION WHILE
WE WAIT FOR THAT I DO WANT TO
MAKE ONE LITTLE NOTE AND SEE IF
THE COMMISSION HAS ANY
DIRECTION.
WE DO GET THESE PERIODIC EMAILS
THAT COME TO THE COMMISSION
INBOX.
YOU HAVE AN INBOX WE MODERATE
THAT.
ONE THING I'M TRYING TO DO TO
KIND OF REDUCE THE AMOUNT
OF ATTACHMENTS IF THERE IS A
STRING OF COMMUNICATIONS I
INCLUDED AS ONE ATTACHMENT WITH
THE WHOLE STRING INCLUDED, IF
YOUR PREFERENCE WOULD BE FOR ME
TO BREAK THOSE OUT AS
INDIVIDUAL COMMUNICATIONS, I'M
HAPPY TO DO THAT.
SO I JUST WANTED TO TELL YOU
WHAT MY PRACTICES BUT I'M
WILLING TO CHANGE IF YOU GIVE
ME DIRECTION TO DO SO.
YEAH I MEAN I THINK HAVING IT
ALL IN ONE THREAD IS PROBABLY
EASIER AND LESS LESS CLICKING
IN REGISTAR SO THAT SOUNDS GOOD
.
ANYONE WHO WANTED TO THE PUBLIC
COMMENTER ANYONE NO I DON'T SEE
ANYONE RAISING THEIR HAND YET.
>> I DO HAVE A COUPLE NAMES
THAT I DON'T RECOGNIZE.
SO IF ANYONE IS DIALING IN FROM
A PUBLIC EITHER VIA A PHONE
CALL OR ZOOME WE ARE IN THE
PUBLIC COMMENT SECTION OF THE
AGENDA SO FEEL FREE TO HIT THE
HAND FEATURE IF YOU WISH TO
ADDRESS THE COMMISSION THEN I
WILL PROMOTE YOU TO SPEAK.
ALL RIGHT.
WELL WHY DON'T WE MOVE ALONG?
AS WE'VE SAID IN THE PAST, IF
SOMEONE WAS HAVING TECHNICAL
DIFFICULTIES WE CAN REOPEN
PUBLIC COMMENT LATER IN THE
AGENDA IF NEEDED BUT NOW WE
WILL MOVE ON TO BUSINESS
STARTING WITH CITY COUNCIL
TRANSPORTATION ISSUES.
SO AT THE FEBRUARY
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
MEETING, COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGS
ASKED THE COMMISSION TO PROVIDE
SUGGESTIONS ABOUT
TRANSPORTATION ISSUES THAT
COULD BE BROUGHT BEFORE CITY
COUNCIL SO AS A WAY TO SORT
OF LIKE BRING MORE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR COUNCIL TO
MAKE SOME CHANGES.
SO AS PART OF THE HOMEWORK WE
WERE ENCOURAGED TO REVIEW THE
THE POLICY AGENDA
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT WE
APPROVED IN JANUARY AND SORT
OF EVERYONE WHO'S YOUR TOP
THREE AND AND USE THAT AS A AS
STARTING PLACE TO TO PICK A
HANDFUL OF PRIORITIES THAT WE
COULD ASK ERIKA TO BRING BACK
TO TO COUNCIL TO START TO THINK
ABOUT HOW SHE MIGHT MOVE THOSE
THREE COUNCIL.
>> SO RAYMONDE, WE HAD TALKED
ABOUT SORT MAYBE PUTTING UP
LIKE SHARING DOING A SHARED
SCREEN AND JUST SORT OF LIKE
MAYBE DOING A GOOGLE DOCUSIGN
OR WHATEVER WORD DOCUMENT
SOMETHING WHERE PEOPLE CAN SORT
OF NAME THEIR PRIORITIES AND WE
CAN START TO SEE IF THERE'S
SOME CONCESSIVE CONSENSUS
AROUND SOME OF THE THINGS THAT
WERE ON THE COUNCIL AGENDA.
I'LL ADMIT I ALSO ADDED A
COUPLE OF THINGS THAT WEREN'T
ON THE AGENDA THAT I'M THINKING
ABOUT THAT I KEEP HEARING ABOUT
IN OTHER PLACES BUT TO START I
THINK WE SHOULD STICK WITH WHAT
WE'VE ALREADY APPROVED AS A
POLICY AGENDA ITEMS SO SO I
THINK LET'S SEE WHERE ARE YOU
GOING TO DO DOES THAT WORK FOR
YOU?
MAYBE YOU IS THIS WILL BE A
LITTLE CLUNKY SO I APOLOGIZE
BUT I'LL JUST SHARE THE PDF
OF THE LOCAL AGENDA THAT WE DID
BACK IN JANUARY AND THEN I'LL
JUST KIND OF ADD SOME COMMENTS
TO IT EITHER AS POST-IT NOTES
OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT AND THEN
WE CAN KIND OF USE THAT TO
TRACK SOME OF THE DISCUSSION.
I SEE WHERE IT GOES THAT I'M SO
JUST BACK A LITTLE BIT
OF PATIENCE OF YOU ALL WHILE I
KIND OF MUDDLE MY WAY THROUGH
THAT PROCESS WITH YOU HERE FOR
JUST A SECOND
AND I'LL JUST
CHIME IN AS THIS LIST IS BEING
GENERATED.
I CERTAINLY WELCOME FEEDBACK
FROM YOUR STAFF THAT THERE'S
OBVIOUSLY THESE ARE THINGS THAT
WERE GOING TO END UP PUTTING ON
YOUR YOUR PLATE IF THERE IS
CONSENSUS AND YOU WANT TO SHARE
THOUGHTS AROUND TIMING OR
DIFFERENT THINGS LIKE THAT,
THAT'S THAT'S ALSO HELPED TO
THAT.
>> I MEANT TO ASK IF THERE WAS
ANYTHING YOU WANTED TO ADD
.
SO DID MY SCREEN COME UP AND
YOU WILL SEE THAT?
>> YEP.
OK, SURGUT SO WE CAN JUST MAYBE
WHY DON'T WE JUST SORT OF GO
AROUND AND NAME LIKE FOLKS HAVE
DONE THE HOMEWORK OR IF WE WANT
TO TAKE JUST A MOMENT AND
REVIEW WHAT'S ON THE WHAT'S ON
THIS LIST
, IT'S FUNNY THAT I
DON'T KNOW WHERE THE UNDERLINES
CAME FROM.
>> I HAVE THEM IN MIND
ADEQUATELY.
YEAH, I'M SORRY THOSE WERE NEW.
SO YOU KNOW, TOP OF THE
DOCUMENT IT SHOWS THAT ANY
OF THE NEW ADDITIONS TO YOUR
TWENTY TWO ARE UNDERLINED AND
THEN ANYTHING WE REMOVED WAS
STRUCK THROUGH SO OK THANKS I
WELL I'M SORRY I IF YOU WANT I
CAN JUST DO A VERY QUICK RUN
THROUGH ON WHAT THESE ARE KIND
OF SYNOPSIZE THEM IF THAT HELPS
WITH THE DISCUSSION AND THEN WE
CAN GO FROM THERE.
YEAH YEAH.
SO THE FIRST ONE IS ABOUT
STRENGTHENING PARTNERSHIPS.
THE SECOND BULLET IS ABOUT
REMOVING PARKING MINIMUMS.
THE THIRD BULLET IS DATA DRIVEN
DECISION MAKING.
THE NEXT ONE IS A BICYCLE
PURCHASE INCENTIVE PROGRAM.
NEXT WE HAVE TRANSIT SUPPORTED
DEVELOPMENT.
THE NEXT TWO BULLETS ARE
SOMEWHAT RELATED.
THERE'S A TRANSIT COMMUTING
MAKING IT FASTER, MORE
CONVENIENT AND CHEAPER AND THEN
SIMILARLY THE BULLET AFTER THAT
IS TO IMPROVE ON TIME TRAVEL ON
BUS ROUTES WITH TRANSIT ONLY
LANES AND SIGNALS.
THE NEXT ONE DOWN IS TO MAKE
SURE THAT BIKE LANES ARE CLEAR
OF OBSTRUCTION.
NEXT IS A MAJOR STREET TRAFFIC
COMING PROGRAM.
>> THEN THE NEXT BULLET WHICH
HAS A SERIES OF SUB BULLET TALK
ABOUT CLEAN ENERGY VEHICLES AND
THEN THE LAST TWO BULLETS
SECOND TO LAST IS ABOUT A LOCAL
POWER GRID AND THE VERY LAST
ONE IS ABOUT WINTER SIDEWALK
MAINTENANCE.
>> SOME ALL RIGHT.
>> AND IF YOU SO WE'RE NOT
SEEING THE ENTIRE AGENDA.
YEAH, THE SCROLLING IS FINE BUT
WE AND WE CAN START AT THE TOP
JUST TO TO BE CLEAR.
SO WHY DON'T WE I'M JUST SORT
OF GOING TO GO IN ORDER OF WHO
I SEE IN MY LITTLE BRADY BUNCH
SCREEN AND JUST CALL IN FOLKS
AND IF YOU NEED MORE TIME YOU
CAN JUST PASS.
SO FIRST PERSON I SEE IS WEW I
THANK YOU.
SO I THINK ADVOCATING FOR LOCAL
LEVEL POLICY AND LAND USE
INVESTMENTS THAT ENCOURAGES
TRANSIT SUPPORTED DEVELOPMENT
OBVIOUSLY AND I HAVE TO MAKE
ONE SPECIFIC DISCLAIMER I WORK
FOR AN EMPLOYER THAT OWNS LAND
IN ONE SO I WANT TO JUST MAKE
THAT CLEAR.
THAT BEING SAID, I DO THINK
IT'S IN THE BEST INTEREST
OF THE COMMUNITY TO ADVOCATE
FOR ADDITIONAL INVESTMENT.
SO I THINK IT'S BASICALLY LIKE
TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE
SO CONNECTED SIDEWALKS,
SIDEWALKS ON BOTH SIDE OF THE
STREETS ON MANAGING PRIVATE
LANDOWNERS CONNECTIVITY AND
SIDEWALKS BECAUSE THAT CAN GET
KIND OF DIFFICULT IN TERMS
OF PUBLIC RIGHT AWAY DOING WHAT
WE CAN TO MAKE SURE THAT WE DO
HAVE CONNECTED BIKEWAYS,
CONNECTED SIDEWALKS AND SO THE
LOCAL POLICY AND LAND-USE USE
INVESTMENT FROM LIKE A LAND USE
STANDPOINT.
I THINK WE HAVE IT DONE FROM
THE TRANSPORTATION SIDE.
I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT FOR US
ALSO ADVOCATE FOR CONNECTED
BIKE LANES CONNECTING B2B
PARTS, ET CETERA.
THAT'S NUMBER ONE FOR ME.
NUMBER TWO WOULD BE
PRIORITIZING DATA DRIVEN
DECISION MAKING.
OBVIOUSLY THAT'S THE BEST WAY
TO THINK ABOUT THINGS
COLLECTING TRAVEL PATTERNS,
DAISY CHAINING LIKELIHOODS
THINGS LIKE THAT BENCHMARKING
AND STATISTICAL DATA COLLECTION
.
LOOK, RAYMOND, FOR EXAMPLE,
WHEN YOU GAVE US THE DATA ON
MAIN STREET FOR EXAMPLE, I
THOUGHT THE SINGLE LANE FOR
SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS ADHERENCE
TO SPEED LIMITS, THINGS LIKE
THAT THAT KIND OF DATA IS VERY,
VERY HELPFUL FOR EXPLAINING TO
PEOPLE THAT.
SO I THINK DATA DRIVEN DECISION
MAKING AND HAVING MORE ROBUST
DATA COLLECTION THAT IS USEFUL
AND HELPS TO MAKE SALIENT
POINTS FOR US TO KNOW WHERE TO
SPEND TIME ON.
THE LAST THING FOR ME ACTUALLY
IS THE ON TIME TRAVEL WITH BUS
ROUTES POTENTIALLY TRANSIT ONLY
LANES SIGNALS THAT PRIORITIZE
BUSSES.
I THINK I REALLY THINK THAT
NEEDS TO DO A BETTER JOB
OF REALLY SHOWING THAT PUBLIC
TRANSIT CAN BE EFFICIENT AND A
PREFERABLE WAY TO GET AROUND AS
OPPOSED TO IT'S LIKE SOMEBODY
RESORT AND SOMEBODY PULLING
THEIR NOSE RIGHT NEXT TO
OF THING LIKE I WANT THERE TO
BE A MORE POSITIVE SOCIAL
ASSOCIATION WITH TAKING PUBLIC
TRANSIT AND IT'S CHEAPER IT'S
EASIER.
IT'S MORE CONVENIENT.
SO SO THOSE KINDS OF THINGS I
THINK ARE VERY IMPORTANT.
MOLLY, IS THIS THE KIND
OF FEEDBACK THAT YOU WERE
LOOKING FOR?
SO I JUST WANTED TO MAKE SO
THOSE WERE MY TOP THREE?
>> I THINK SO.
AND I'M GOING TO JUST BUMP THAT
OVER TO ERIKA SINCE THIS IS FOR
REALLY I THINK FOR USE WELL AND
I MEAN SORT OF IS IT MEAN IN
TERMS OF AS WE'RE LOOKING AT
PRIORITIES IN HERE, I'M ALSO
LOOKING FOR THINGS THAT
SPECIFICALLY MAY NOT BE
UNDERWAY.
FOR EXAMPLE, TRANSIT ORIENTED
THINGS THAT YOU'D REALLY LIKE
ME TO BE INTRODUCING AT THE
COUNCIL TABLE MAYBE BRINGING
BACK TO TRANSPORT, BRINGING
BACK TO TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION FOR MORE WORK AT THE
DIRECTION OF OF COUNCIL
DIFFERENT PIECES THAT WE MAY
WANT TO BE SPENDING
PRIORITIZING OUR TIME ON OVER
THE NEXT NEXT COUPLE OF YEARS
IN TERMS OF POLICY AND POLICY
WORK ON SOME OF THIS IS SOME
OF THIS IS IS APPROACHES THAT
THE STAFF IS ALREADY USING THAT
WE'RE ENCOURAGING.
BUT YEAH.
>> ALL RIGHT.
IF I WAS TO JUST REALLY QUICKLY
SUMMARIZE THEN ERIKA WOULD BE
ALIGNING TRANSPORTATION
INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENTS WITH
LAND USE, REALLY COORDINATING
LAND USE AND TRANSPORTATION
POLICY.
SO THE THOUGHT OF HAVING THESE
DEVELOPMENTS NEEDS TO BE DONE
IN TANDEM WITH REINFORCING AND
STRENGTHENING BIKE LANE
CONNECTIVITY B2B TRAILS AS WELL
AS BUS ROUTES THAT ARE ON TIME
AND MORE CONVENIENT.
SO I THINK IT CAN'T HAPPEN JUST
BY REALLY MEANS WE KIND OF LIKE
A PRIVATE PUBLIC COLLABORATION
SO THAT THAT WOULD BE KIND
OF MY BIG ONE.
SO HOPEFULLY THAT HELPS.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
NEXT UP I SEE JULIE HI.
SO ONE THING THAT FOR ME IS A
NO BRAINER IS ADVOCATE FOR THE
DEVELOPMENT OF A MAJOR STREET
TRAFFIC CULLING PROGRAM.
I HOPE THAT'S ALREADY UNDERWAY
BECAUSE IT'S PART OF THE VISION
ZERO IMPLEMENTATION PLAN.
SO MAYBE I CAN CALL THAT ZERO
INSTEAD OF MY FIRST ONE AND
THEN I'M GOING TO SECOND ONE ON
INCREASING THE ON TIME TRAVEL
ON BUS ROUTES AND MAKING THAT A
MORE DESIRABLE.
I'VE STARTED TRYING TO TAKE THE
BUS AGAIN AFTER A LONG ABSENCE
FROM IT DURING THE PANDEMIC AND
AND THERE CONTINUE TO BE THINGS
THAT ARE ANNOYING ABOUT IT LIKE
I WAS TRYING TO PLAN MY ROUTE
FROM CAMPUS TO HOME AND IT KEPT
AND I WORK AT LEAST TALL WHICH
IS RIGHT NEAR THE CENTRAL
CAMPUS TRANSIT CENTER AND I
KEPT DIRECTING ME TO SOMEWHERE
AWAY ACROSS CAMPUS TO CATCH THE
BUS AND I I ACTUALLY CALLED AND
SAID, YOU KNOW, TO MAKE SURE
THAT THE BUS WAS ACTUALLY STILL
STOPPING AT A CENTRAL CAMPUS
TRANSIT CENTER AND IT WAS BUT
SOMEHOW THE THE SOFTWARE TOOLS
WEREN'T WORKING PROPERLY.
THERE'S JUST LIKE EVERYTHING WE
CAN DO TO MAKE THAT THE BEST
WAY TO GET AROUND TOWN OTHER
THAN BY BIKING OR WALKING WHICH
FOR SOME PEOPLE THAT WILL NEVER
BE THE BEST WAY BUT THE BUS CAN
WORK FOR A LOT OF PEOPLE IF WE
MAKE NICE SO SO THAT THAT'S BIG
FOR ME AND THEN I KNOW IT'S
SUPER EXPENSIVE BUT I THINK THE
WINTER SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE CAN
REALLY MAKE A BIG DIFFERENCE
AND A LOT OF PEOPLE'S
WINTERTIME LIVES AND ESPECIALLY
SOME OF THE MORE VULNERABLE
POPULATIONS AND SO IT'S KIND
OF AN EQUITY ISSUE ALSO.
>> SO I WANTED TO PUT THAT IN
MY TOP THREE AND THEN I WOULD
ALSO RANK REMOVING PARKING
MINIMUMS HIGH ON MY LIST.
>> SO THAT'S THE SECOND BULLET
POINT AND THAT'S RELATED TO MY
WANTING TO MAKE THE BEST USE
MORE ATTRACTIVE AND JUST MAKING
IT LESS ATTRACTIVE TO RELY
SOLELY ON YOUR CAR FOR GETTING
AROUND TOWN
.
GREAT.
THANK YOU.
MEGHAN IS NEXT.
>> HELLO.
YEAH JULIE I THINK I AGREE WITH
A LOT OF WHAT YOU JUST SAID AND
EVERYTHING LOOKS SO GREAT SO
IT'S HARD TO CHOOSE BUT I HAVE
BEEN THINKING ABOUT WINTER
SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE FOR SINCE
I MOVED UP NORTH BASICALLY.
SO DEFINITELY WITH THAT I THINK
THAT THERE'S A PILOT ALREADY
HAPPENING.
SO THAT WAS ON MY MIND TOO.
VERY HAPPY ABOUT THAT.
PARKING MINIMUMS ALSO WAS ON MY
LIST REMOVING THEM THAT IS AND
FOR ALL THE REASONS THAT JULIE
SAID I THINK TRAFFIC AND ALSO I
WAS ALSO HAD RESTRUCTURING
PARKING FEES AND OF COURSE THAT
HAS TO BE COUPLED WITH
INCREASING FREQUENCY.
I THINK THAT PARKING DOWNTOWN
IS LIKE KIND OF SHOCKINGLY
CHEAP RIGHT NOW.
SO I WOULD LOVE TO SEE US MAYBE
CHANGE THAT JUST TO AGAIN MAKE
IT A LITTLE BIT MORE ATTRACTIVE
TO TAKE THE BUS DOWNTOWN AND
YEAH, I THINK THAT'S PRETTY
MUCH I HAD EVERYTHING
EVERYTHING LOOKS GREAT.
GREAT.
NEXT UP IS IS BRETT.
THANK YOU.
FIRST I WOULD AND THESE ARE IN
NO PARTICULAR ORDER BUT THE
MAJOR STREETS TRAFFIC CALMING
WHAT WOULD WOULD REALLY LIKE TO
SEE THAT BE FUNDED WELL FUNDED
AND I KIND OF ALONG WITH THAT A
LOT MORE CONSIDERATION FOR ROAD
DIETS THAT MIGHT BE ASSUMED TO
BE PART OF THAT EFFORT.
I HAD TO REMOVE PARKING
MINIMUMS ON HERE BUT I THINK
THAT'S COMING TO COUNCIL VERY
SOON.
I PLANNING JUST PAST THAT SO
MAYBE I'LL HELP, YOU KNOW,
OPTIMISTICALLY HOPE THAT THAT'S
A FOREGONE CONCLUSION GENERALLY
FUNDING BY ALL AGES ALL
ABILITIES BIKE NETWORK
INFRASTRUCTURE OUTSIDE THE
DENHA SO TO BUILD ON OR BUILD A
ALL AGES ALL ABILITIES BIKE
NETWORK THAT'S WHAT WE'VE DONE
WITHIN THE DENHA IS AMAZING
AWESOME AND IT KEEPS GOING
EVERY YEAR BUT I'D REALLY LIKE
TO SEE THAT EXPANDED OUTSIDE
OF THE DENHA AND AGAIN BECAUSE
I DON'T THINK WE NEED TO REALLY
FOCUS ON THE PARKING MINIMUMS.
I WOULD LIKE TO CHOOSE THE
FASTER MORE CONVENIENT TRANSIT
SUPPORTING THAT AND I REALLY
LIKE THE ADDITION THAT I THINK
IT WAS.
MEGAN SAID I CAN DO ABOUT
DOWNTOWN PARKING RATES IN
COOPERATION WITH I THINK IT'S
SOMETHING THAT COUNCIL CAN WELL
MAYBE NOT MAYBE IT'S A DATE
THEN BUT YEAH TO MAKE TRANSIT
MORE ATTRACTIVE THAT'S AN
ALTERNATIVE AND JUST BY
CONVENIENCE I THINK YOU'RE
RIGHT.
THANKS, ERIKA.
I DON'T KNOW IF YOU WANTED TO
CONTRIBUTE YOUR NEXT ON MY ON
MY LIST OF PEOPLE IF YOU HAVE
IF YOU WANT TO SHARE WHAT YOU
FEEL ARE SOME OF YOUR BIG
PRIORITIES.
WELL, I GUESS THERE'S A COUPLE
OF THINGS THAT HAVE COME UP
THAT I PROBABLY COULD HAVE
ASKED MENTIONED THIS AT THE
BEGINNING THAT I WOULDN'T MIND
FEEDBACK ON.
SO ONE THING THAT I COULD
IMAGINE THAT IT MIGHT BE USEFUL
FOR US TO REEXAMINE IS OUR
CROSSWALK DESIGN GUIDELINES AND
MAKE SURE THAT WE'VE GONE TO
THAT PROCESS A FEW YEARS AGO
MAKING SURE THAT REVISITING
THOSE AND SEEING IF THEY STILL
SEEM APPROPRIATE IN TERMS
OF THE USE OF CERTAIN MORE
MAJOR STREETS THE THE THE USE
OF OUR AND THINGS LIKE THAT
JUST KIND OF GO INTO THAT
PROCESS.
I DON'T KNOW IF THAT'S
SOMETHING OF INTEREST.
IT'S SOMETHING THAT'S KIND
OF COME UP FOR ME.
THAT'S SOMETHING SOMETHING WE
MIGHT WANT TO TAKE A LOOK AT
AGAIN.
OBVIOUSLY THERE'S BRIGHTY
DIFFERENT FACTORS THAT WE NEED
TO LOOK AT IN THAT AND THEN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD INVESTMENT PROGRAM
IS SOMETHING THAT I HAVE YOU WE
HAVE A LONG LIST
OF NEIGHBORHOODS THAT WAITING
LISTS FOR NEIGHBORHOODS THAT
ARE INTERESTED IN NEIGHBORHOODS
THAT ARE GARRIGA.
I'M JUST CURIOUS SOMEONE WAS
UNMUTED BUT IT LOOKS LIKE THEY
DID SO IF YOU COULD JUST SAY
THAT LAST BIT AGAIN.
>> SO IT'S THE NEIGHBORHOOD
TRAFFIC CALMING PROGRAM IS ALSO
SOMETHING THAT THERE'S A LONG
WAITING LIST FOR.
I THINK IT'S VERY LABOR
INTENSIVE FROM THE STAFF
PERSPECTIVE.
IT TAKES A NUMBER OF YEARS TO
GET THERE.
WE DON'T HAVE ENOUGH FUNDING
FOR IT.
SO KNOW TAKING A LOOK AT THAT
PROGRAM AND MAKING SURE YOU
KNOW ARE THE THE STANDARDS THAT
WE ARE USING RIGHT NOW, DO WE
THINK THAT THAT'S KIND
OF APPROPRIATE AND THIS IS JUST
A CHALLENGE THAT WE'RE IN SO
THOSE ARE TWO QUESTIONS I GUESS
I HAVE FOR THE FOR THE GROUP IN
TERMS HOW MUCH OF A PRIORITY
SOME OF THESE THINGS KIND
OF COME UP FOR ME ARE FOR THE
COMMISSIONER AT LARGE.
OBVIOUSLY I SUPPORT ALL OF THE
THINGS THAT'S TOO RIGHT.
>> YEAH.
I WAS THINKING MAYBE AT THE END
WE CAN SORT OF OPEN IT UP FOR
THINGS THAT ARE NOT ON THIS
LIST TO TALK ABOUT THOSE I HAVE
ONE THAT I WANT TO ADD AS WELL
AND SEE IF THERE ARE OTHER SEE
IF WE IF THERE'S CONSENSUS
AROUND SOME OF THOSE AS WELL.
SO THANKS.
THAT SOUNDS GREAT.
NEXT UP IS AURLIE.
>> I'M REALLY GLAD I WASN'T IN
THE EARLIER GROUP BECAUSE I WAS
REALLY DIFFICULT TO NARROW IT
DOWN BUT EXPANDING
INFRASTRUCTURE FOR PARKING
FACILITIES SPECIFICALLY FOR
BIKES AND I WOULD EVEN THINK TO
ADD LIKE A SHELTER JUST TO
CONNECT LIKE BICYCLES TO LIKE
BUSSES SO THAT IF THERE IS LIKE
A PARK LIKE PARKING
SPECIFICALLY FOR BIKES IS WHAT
I WAS LIKE ENVISIONING THAT AND
I THINK THAT WOULD BE PRETTY
NEAT INCREASE ON TIME TRAVEL
AND TRANSIT ONLY LANES I I LIKE
THAT ONE AS WELL AND OF COURSE
WINTER SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE SO
YEAH I GET UNCAPTURED FOR THE
FIRST POINT YOU MENTIONED ABOUT
BIKE FACILITIES WAS THAT AN
EXISTING BULLET THAT I'M
MISSING OR IS THAT A NEW
THOUGHT FOR LIKE A NEW IDEA?
IT WAS THE EXPAND
INFRASTRUCTURE AND SPECIFICALLY
FOR LIKE BICYCLE PARKING AND I
JUST THOUGHT THAT IT WOULD BE
NEAT TO CONNECT TO LIKE SHELTER
LIKE BUS SHELTERS JUST TO
INCREASE CONNECTIONS BETWEEN
BICYCLES AND BUS BUSSES IS WHEN
I ADDED I SORRY WE WERE
SUPPOSED TO WAIT UNTIL THE END
FOR IT'S IT GIVES PEOPLE A
CHANCE TO TO MULL THESE
ADDITIONS OVER.
I THINK AUTHOR RAYMOND YOU HAVE
IT.
>> YEAH.
I MIGHT NEED YOU LET YOU JUST
GET CAUGHT UP ON THIS TYPING
SINCE I GOT LOST ON A FIRST
POINT SO
FORTUNATELY THIS IS A
LIGHT AGENDA THIS WEEK SO WE
HAVE TIME TO REALLY LIKE SINK
OUR TEETH INTO THIS PARTICULAR
TOPIC FOR A LITTLE WHILE AND
THEN AURLIE, WHAT WAS YOUR
SECOND ONE?
>> I'M SORRY AND INCREASE ON
TIME TRAVEL THOUGH.
THAT'S THE YEAH.
THAT'S UNDERLINED YOUR THIRD
ONE.
>> WINTER SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE.
THANK YOU FOR SEE HOW THAT
MATERIALIZES.
YEAH.
NEXT UP IS TIM YEAH.
SO YEAH I GOING THROUGH THIS
THING THE I GUESS THE THINK I
WANT TO PUT THE PARK PARKING
MINIMUMS ON THERE AND THAT'S
ONE OF THEM AND THE TWO TRANSIT
ONES ARE BOTH STANDING OUT BUT
MIGHT GO WITH THE THE MAKE
TRANSIT COMMUTING PAST OR ONE
BY ONE BUT I MEAN IT'S HARD TO
PICK BETWEEN TWO BUT I WANT TO
GET THOSE BOHLIG BUT AND GO
WITH THE FIRST ONE OF THEM AND
THEN GO AT THE WINTER SIDEWALK
MAINTENANCE DEFINITELY ONE THAT
WELL I GUESS I'LL JUST GO AT
BOTH THE TRANSIT ONES IN THE
WINTER SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE I
KNOW THE PARKING MINIMUMS IS
ALREADY A PRIORITY FOR THEM FOR
SURE AND BECAUSE IT WENT
THROUGH THE PLANNING COMMISSION
ALREADY AND JUST YEAH.
IN GENERAL I THINK THE TRANSIT
NEEDS TO BE MORE IN THE WINTER
SIDEWALKS IS DEFINITELY
SOMETHING THAT CAN BE A BIG
BARRIER FOR A LOT OF PEOPLE
THAT PARTICULARLY PEOPLE WITH
DISABILITIES AND
HAVE THE
TRANSIT I WISH THEY WOULD SAY
IN GENERAL IMPROVING FREQUENCY
BECAUSE NOT JUST THE BUSIEST
TIMES OF DAY.
I MEAN ACTUALLY A LITTLE LESS
BUSY TIMES A DAY CAN BE THE
WORST PARTS I MEAN NIGHTS AND
WEEKENDS AND THAT'S ACTUALLY
WHAT THEY WANT TO FOCUS ON
BECAUSE A LOT OF TIMES THE
BUSIEST TIMES OF DAY ARE
COVERED PRETTY WELL WHEREAS
IT'S MORE OF THE OFF PEAK THAT
IS NOT COVERED AS WELL AND
WHERE IT'S LIKE THERE'S NOT
LIKE IT'S RUNNING ONCE AN HOUR
AND IF YOU WANT TO MAKE A
CONNECTION THEN IT CAN BE THE
WORST BECAUSE THE CONNECTIONS
NOT LINE UP AND IT'S LIKE OH
YOU HAVE TO SIT FOR A HALF HOUR
AT BLAKE TRANSIT CENTER.
WELL NO ONE WANTS TO DO THAT
TRIP.
MUST THEY HAVE TO I MEAN WAIT
TIME IS BAD ENOUGH IF IT'S AT
THE END POINTS BUT WAIT TIMES
THE TRANSFER POINTS IS WORSE.
YEAH PARTICULARLY IN WINTER.
>> RIGHT RIGHT.
ALL RIGHT.
I'M STICKING LET'S SEE HERE I
THINK NEXT UP I SEE JIM OK,
HELLO EVERYBODY.
GO TOUGH FOR ME TOO.
I MEAN WHAT TO UNPACK AND TO
FROM ALL GOOD WE SHOULD BE
DOING ALL OF IT TO PICK THREE
KIND OF TOUGH BUT WE OWN A BIKE
SHOP SO I'M GOING TO CHECK WITH
ANYTHING THAT BRINGS ONE PEOPLE
INTO TOWN.
I'M GOING ACROSS TOWN WITH BIKE
SO YOU KNOW BIKE PATROL CAME IN
SECOND, YOU KNOW, INCLUDING
DIELECTRIC ELECTRIC BIKE IS
GOING TO BE HIGH.
I MEAN WE ACTUALLY DO THIS
BECAUSE WE THINK IT'S THE
ABSOLUTE BEST THING THAT I FEEL
THAT WE CAN DO TO SAVE THE
PLANET AGAINST.
SO THAT REALLY SHOULD BE SOME
TYPE OF INCENTIVE PROGRAM TO
GET PEOPLE MORE PEOPLE AND BIKE
LIGHT ELECTRIC VEHICLE SCOOT
OUT OF ANY YOU KNOW, WHITE
ELECTRIC MOBILITY AND LIKE THE
CITY REALLY DOES HAVE A VERY
POWERFUL ABILITY TO GET THAT
IDEA OUT TO THE PUBLIC AND SO
EXPANDING ON THAT ELECTRIFYING
THE PUBLIC, YOU KNOW, VEHICLES
IS SOMETHING THAT SHOULD BE
VERY HIGH ON THE AGENDA.
YEAH, CREATING SO I BAG AND
IMPROVE THE INFRASTRUCTURE AND
POWER TO ENCOURAGE CLEAN ENERGY
VEHICLES.
THAT WOULD BE MY NUMBER TWO AND
PROBABLY THE ROAD DIET AND
ANYTHING TO CALM TRAFFIC AND IF
I CAN ADD ANOTHER ONE IT'S
GOING TO BE KEEPING THE BIKE
LANE CLEAN.
YOU KNOW WE YOU COME EVERY
SINGLE DAY AND ESPECIALLY THE
TO THE POUTING AND SELF
PILOTING THAT CRAFT BIKE LANE
IS A BIG PROBLEM AT LEAST YOU
KNOW WE SEVERAL TIMES A WEEK
WHEN WE ENCOUNTER, YOU KNOW,
VEHICLES BEING COUNT ACROSS THE
BIKE LANE WAITING TO GET INTO
THE COUNTY CONTRUCTION SO THAT
TIME OF DAY MAYBE CALL THAT
PROJECT THE BIKE LANE MAYBE
CLOSED DURING HEAVY TIMES
OF THE DAY BACK I GUESS I GUESS
THAT YEAH.
IT'S ALL GOOD.
I COULD I COULD JUST GO ON AND
ON BUT GO COULD BE THE THREE
THAT THAT I WORK I I WOULD
THROW IN THERE AND AGAIN I
WOULD JUST EMPHASIZE THAT ON A
WEEKLY BASIS FROM DAY ONE WHEN
PEOPLE COMING IN THAT ARE
REALLY HAPPY AND BEGAN TO GET
YOU A BIKE AND BIKE AND I'LL
TELL TRANSPORTATION PRIVATE
TRANSPORTATION TO GET INTO AND
OUT OF TOWN BECAUSE OF THE
IMPROVING TRAINING BEING MADE
SO I GET THAT GET X NEXT UP IS
SUZETTE
I MEAN NOW WE WERE BOTH
MADE IT YOU HAVE IT.
>> WE STILL CAN'T HEAR YOU
UNFORTUNATELY.
BUT HOLD ON RAYMOND.
CAN YOU UNMUTED HER
?
>> HEY, CAN YOU HEAR ME NOW?
YES, WE GOT YOU AMAZING.
I HAVE A WORK COMPUTER
COMPATIBILITY THING.
I ALSO HAVE COVID WHICH IS
SOUND WISE AND AWFUL.
>> I REALLY LIKED ALL THE
FUNDING RELATED ONES FOR THE
INFRASTRUCTURE.
I THINK IT'S THE FOURTH ONE
DOWN THE TALKS ABOUT AT THE
STATE LEVEL ADVOCATING FOR
INCREASED TRANSIT FUNDING BOTH
LOCAL AND REGIONAL.
I SAW A REALLY NICE THING ON
THE INTERNET THAT TALKED ABOUT
HOW WE DON'T PAY TO USE STREET
STREETLIGHTS.
WE SHOULDN'T HAVE TO PAY TO USE
BUSSES JUST FRAMING TRANSIT AS
A BASIC CITIZEN.
RIGHT.
AND I LIKE THAT GOING DOWN.
I THINK SOMEONE TAPPED ON A LOT
THE MAKING TRANSIT IN THE
STRIVE TO MAKE TRANSIT
COMMUTING EFFICIENT FASTER,
MORE CONVENIENT, CHEAPER ETC.
AND ALSO THE WINTER SIDEWALK
MAINTENANCE.
THE ONE QUESTION I HAD THOUGH
WAS ABOUT ALLOWING THE RTA THE
ABILITY TO REQUEST SALES TAX OR
AN ALTERNATIVE TO PROPERTY TAX.
I WAS CURIOUS WHAT THE
MOTIVATION WAS TO SHIFT AWAY
FROM PROPERTY TAXES IN GENERAL
I THINK OF PROPERTY BEING MORE
EQUITABLE IN TERMS OF HOW IT
REQUIRES MONEY FROM PEOPLE.
>> YEAH, I THINK THE ISSUE WITH
THE RTA WAS IS THAT AND FOLKS
WHO'VE MORE INVESTED IN THIS
CAN CORRECT ME IF I'M WRONG BUT
THAT IN PART BECAUSE OF THE
RELIANCE ON PROPERTY TAX
THERE'S DIFFERENT
MUNICIPALITIES KEEP VOTING TO
OPT OUT AND I THINK THE HOPE
WAS THAT IF THERE COULD BE SOME
ALTERNATIVE FUNDING MECHANISM
WE COULD SIDESTEP THOSE PEOPLE
WHO KEEP VOTING TO OPT OUT AND
ACTUALLY CREATE A USEFUL
NETWORK BY FUNDING IT IN SOME
OTHER WAY INSTEAD OF RELYING ON
SUBURBANITES TO VOTE TO FUND
TRANSIT THAT THEY DON'T THINK
OF AS BEING FOR THEM.
THAT'S MY UNDERSTANDING OF THE
MOTIVATION FOR THAT PARTICULAR
ITEM.
>> I KNOW.
YEAH, I THINK IT REQUIRES A
CHANGE TO THE CONSTITUTION AND
AS SUCH WOULD HAVE TO BE ON THE
BALLOT.
BUT I KNOW A LOT OF OTHER
MUNICIPALITIES AND OTHER STATES
FUND WITH THE LOCAL SALES TAX
AND THAT OFFERED I MEAN THE
PROPERTY TAXES GO UP.
YEAH, I'M GETTING A LOT
OF OPPOSITION BECAUSE IT'S LIKE
A BUNCH OF PEOPLE WITH
HOMEOWNERS THAT HAVE LARGE HOME
THE SUBURBS JUST LIKE UPSET
ABOUT IT AND THEY EITHER OPT
OUT OR THEY CAUSE IT TO FAIL
WHICH LIKE THE RTA PROPERTY TAX
HAS NO OPT OUT MECHANISM.
BUT THE LAST
THEY PUT IT ON THE
BALLOT IT FAILED BECAUSE OF THE
VOTES OF THOSE SUBURBAN EXURBAN
VOTERS AND I GUESS THE IDEA IS
TO OFFER MORE FLEXIBILITY AND
YEAH, I MEAN THAT'S ONE OF THE
IDEAS THOUGH THAT WOULD REQUIRE
A CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.
THE OTHER IDEAS TO ALLOW A TAX
TO BE IMPOSED ON A SUBSET
OF THE THREE COUNTY REGIONS
WHICH WOULDN'T ALLOW OPT OUT
BECAUSE THE BOARD WOULD HAVE TO
SETTLE ON THE SUBSET.
IT WOULDN'T BE LIKE THAT A BUT
IT WOULD ALLOW THEM TO
ESSENTIALLY DRAW IN THE
URBANIZE ONLY IMPOSE IT ON THE
URBANIZED AREA IN WHICH
OFFERING SERVICE WOULD MAKE
SENSE PARTICULARLY FIXED ROUTE
SERVICE.
>> RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
THANKS FOR THAT EXPLANATION
TIM.
SO YEAH THAT'S THE THAT'S THE
BACK STORY WITH THAT ONE AND
ALSO THAT I GUESS I YOU PUT
THAT DOWN BECAUSE THAT'S ON THE
STATE LEVEL LIST THAT WE WERE
TRYING TO GO TO THE COUNCIL
LEVEL LIST RIGHT.
>> YEAH I THINK FOR TODAY OR I
THINK WE'RE WHERE WE'RE TRYING
TO FOCUS MOSTLY ON THINGS THAT
THAT OUR CITY COUNCIL CAN DO
WITHOUT SORT OF LOBBYING OR
LARGER STATEWIDE ACTION.
BUT WORTH CHECKING IN ON SOME
OF THESE BECAUSE I KNOW SUZANNE
AND ALSO MEGAN I THINK JOINED
THE COMMISSION AFTER WE DID
THIS ROUND OF POLICY
RECOMMENDING AND SO I THINK
IT'S STILL IT'S FINE TO REVISIT
SOME OF THOSE AND EXPLAIN THEM
A LITTLE BIT.
SO I WAS STICKING JUST TO THE
COUNCIL MEMBERS WHO ARE MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC AND NOT THE
COMMISSIONERS WHO ARE HERE AND
THEIR PROFESSIONAL ROLES.
SO I THINK WE'RE UP TO ME NOW
AND I HAD SO I'M GOING TO HAVE
PARKING MINIMUMS BE MY ZERO
BECAUSE I KNOW COUNCIL'S
WORKING ON IT BUT I JUST WANT
TO PUT ANOTHER VOTE VOICE
TOWARDS LIKE REALLY PLEASE DO
THAT AND THEN LIKE MANY OTHERS
THE BUS LINES AND SINGLE
PRIORITY ONE AND THE ONE THAT
STARTS WITH INCREASED ON TIME
TRAVEL FOR BUSSES JUST FEELS
HUGE TO ME AND I KNOW THAT
THERE ARE THERE ARE ACTIONS
COUNCIL CAN TAKE AROUND THINGS
LIKE SIGNAL PRIORITY AND LANE
BUS LANES.
I KNOW A LOT OF THAT BUS
RELATED TRANS RELATED THINGS
REQUIRES COORDINATION WITH BUT
THERE ARE BUT SOME OF THESE ARE
INFRASTRUCTURE THINGS THAT I
KNOW COUNCIL CAN DO
INDEPENDENTLY.
SO THAT'S WHY THAT'S ONE OF MY
BIG ONES MAJOR STREETS TRAFFIC
CALMING IS ANOTHER BIG ONE FOR
ME AND THEN I'M GOING TO I'M
GOING TO GO WITH WINTER
SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE LIKE
SEVERAL OTHERS HAVE DESPITE
KNOWING HOW EXPENSIVE IT IS.
AND THEN I'LL ALSO SORT OF KICK
OFF THE ADDING POSSIBILITIES
DISCUSSION WHICH I THINK THE
WAY TO DO THIS.
SO I THINK WE JUST DON'T SPEND
THE ENTIRE NIGHT ON IT IS LIMIT
YOURSELF TO ONE IF YOU IF YOU
HAVE SOMETHING ELSE YOU WANT TO
ADD AND I ACTUALLY THINK WE'VE
THIS HAS BEEN PRETTY CLARIFYING
TO ME ABOUT SOME OF THE CORE
PRIORITIES FOR MEMBERS OF THIS
COMMISSION.
IF THERE'S ANYTHING ELSE YOU
WANT TO ADD, LET'S TRY TO KEEP
IT TO ONE AND TRY TO KEEP
DISCUSSION OF EACH THING PRETTY
BRIEF BUT BUT JUST TO SEE IF
THERE ARE SOME THINGS THAT THAT
HAVEN'T SURFACED YET FOR ME,
THE ONE I WANT TO ADD IS
BANNING RIGHT ON RED DOWNTOWN
IT'S IT'S PEDESTRIAN OF HIS OWN
AND RIGHT ON THE TURN VEHICLE
TURNS ARE THE THINGS THAT ARE
OFTEN MOST DANGEROUS FOR
PEDESTRIANS AND BIKE AND
BICYCLISTS AND SO THAT
PARTICULAR THING BANNING
BANNING RIGHT TURN ON DOWNTOWN
I THINK WOULD MAKE A BIG
DIFFERENCE.
I THINK CITYWIDE WOULD PROBABLY
BE A STRETCH.
SO I'M GOING TO TRY AND KEEP IT
NARROW TO DOWNTOWN.
I THINK AT THIS POINT IT MAY BE
EASIER.
RAYMOND, IF YOU COULD UNLEASH
SHARE YOUR SCREEN SO WE CAN ALL
SORT OF SEE EACH OTHER AGAIN IF
WE NEED TO REFER BACK TO IT
AGAIN WE CAN WE CAN ASK YOU TO
SHARE SO HOW ABOUT WE SORT
OF LET PEOPLE THROW OUT IF
THERE'S ONE MORE THING YOU WANT
TO ADD TO WHAT FOLKS THROW
THOSE OUT AND THEN WE'LL TALK
ABOUT THEM SO WE'LL DO IT
SUGGESTIONS AND THEN
DISCUSSIONS ANYONE HAVE
ANYTHING THEY WANTED TO ADD?
>> JULIE I WOULD JUST SECOND
ERICA ON THE NEIGHBORHOOD
TRAFFIC COMING PROGRAM BECAUSE
THAT'S I MEAN IN THIS IN THIS
ONE SENSE IT'S A HUGE SUCCESS
IN OUR ABILITY TO ENGAGE THE
COMMUNITY AND LOCAL LOCAL
ADVOCATE FOR THINGS.
BUT THE BACKLOG IS JUST
EMBARRASSING AND FRUSTRATING
AND SO THAT MAKES IT SORT
OF RUINS OUR SUCCESS.
THE ONE THING I DON'T LIKE
ABOUT THE NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC
COMING PROGRAM IS THAT IT'S A
REAL SQUEAKY WHEEL PROGRAM AND
SO I WOULD ALSO LIKE TO SEE IT
TAKE A LOCAL NEIGHBORHOOD
REQUEST AND TRY AND THINK NOT
JUST ABOUT THAT ONE BLOCK OR
THAT ONE STREET BUT THE SORT
OF CONNECTING STREETS ALSO SO
THAT IT BROADENS IT A LITTLE
BIT PLUS PLUS ONE TO ALL OF YES
.
>> BRIAN, FIRST THANK YOU FOR
ALL THE ENDORSEMENTS OF THE
TRANSIT OPTIONS AND INTERESTING
DISCUSSION TOO ABOUT SOME
OF THE TECHNOLOGY I I DON'T
THINK IT'S SOMETHING NEW BUT I
WOULD SAY FOR FOR ME AS A
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
MEMBER IT DEFINITELY IS A
NUMBER ONE OF BEING DATA
DRIVEN.
I THINK THE REST OF THE ITEMS
KIND OF FALL OUT FROM THERE
BECAUSE IF YOU'RE IF YOU NEED
TO HAVE THAT THAT DATA DRIVEN
APPROACH TO SAY WE NEED TO
ELIMINATE CAR TRAFFIC ON THIS
LANE OR IN THIS THERE'S THERE'S
ROOM ONLY FOR BIKES AND BUSSES
DOWN THIS ROAD AND THEN YOU
HAVE TO BE DATA DRIVEN TO TO DO
THAT AND IT CAN BE A VERY
EMOTIONAL ARGUMENT TO THE
CONTRARY AT TIMES.
SO BUT THAT WOULD BE MY TWO
CENTS.
THANK YOU, JIM.
I DON'T THINK YOU'RE FROM THE
LEFT BUT WE HAVEN'T HAD A
DOWNTOWN BIKE SHANN IN A LONG
TIME.
SO YOU BIKE SHINY CAN WE
TRAVELED TO OTHER CITY OUR
UNITED STATES.
WE COULD GO RIDE A BIKE AND RUN
ACROSS TOWN AND WE CAN ACTUALLY
GET WE CANNOT DO IT IF WE DON'T
HAVE TO REFUND TO RENT BIKES
AND ON THE WEEKENDS WE GET TO
REQUEST EVERY CLASS RENTAL BIKE
I THINK LIKE AT THE BUS STATION
TRAIN STATION IN TARRYTOWN IN
DOWNTOWN WE NEED TO GET BIKES
GOING BACK UP AND RUNNING.
I MEAN TO ME IT SEEMED LIKE IT
WOULD BE A RELATIVELY BRANKOV
AND GOVERNMENT.
YOU COULD JUST SAY WE'RE GOING
TO LOSE MONEY BUT PEOPLE NEED
TO HAVE BIKES, ESPECIALLY
PEOPLE THAT ARE VISITING KIND
OF DRIVING AROUND TOWN.
THEY CAN CALL AND RIDE BIKES IF
THEY HAVE ACCESS TO THEM.
>> YEAH, THAT'S A GREAT A GREAT
ADDITION.
>> ANYONE ELSE MAY MEGAN, SO
THANK YOU FOR BRINGING UP THE
STANDING RIGHT ON RED BECAUSE
THAT WAS ALSO SOMETHING I WAS
THINKING ABOUT WHICH MEANS I
CAN BRING ON MY OTHER THING
WHICH I AM LIKE TOTALLY OPEN TO
DISCUSSING US BECAUSE I THINK
YOU ALL HAVE TALKED ABOUT IT
BEFORE BUT MAKING A PEDESTRIAN
WALK BASIS AUTOMATIC I KNOW
THAT WE DID THAT DURING THE
BEGINNING OF THE PANDEMIC AND
IT WAS JUST INCREDIBLY USEFUL
ESPECIALLY BY THE HOSPITAL
MAKING KNOWING THAT THAT SIGNAL
IS GOING TO COME ON IT JUST IT
HONESTLY LIKE IN TERMS OF MY
BEHAVIOR IT PREVENTS ME FROM
TRYING TO JAYWALK BECAUSE I
KNOW THAT THE SIGNAL IS GOING
TO COME WHEREAS IF I AM NOT
SURE IF I THINK I JUST MISSED
THE SIGNAL OR WHATEVER, I'M
MORE LIKELY TO TRY AND MAYBE
MAKE A RISKY CROSSING SO I KNOW
THAT WE DO THIS DOWNTOWN.
I WOULD LOVE TO SEE IT MAYBE
EXPAND IT ESPECIALLY IF NOT
EVERYWHERE AT LEAST IN AREAS
WITH A LOT OF PEDESTRIAN
TRAFFIC.
>> YEAH, THAT'S A GREAT ONE.
ALL RIGHT.
SO I'M COGNIZANT THAT WE STILL
HAVE OTHER THINGS TO TALK ABOUT
SO I'M WONDERING IF WE CAN JUST
DO SORT OF LIKE A QUICK SORT
OF LIKE GROUP THUMBS UPS FOR
THINGS THAT WE ARE LIKE ON
BOARD WITH TO MAYBE ADD OF THE
THINGS THAT WE'VE JUST ADDED
AND THUMBS UP IS ONE MORE LIKE
IT'S GOING TO BE LIKE A BIG
THUMBS UP, RIGHT.
BECAUSE WE DON'T WE ALL JUST
SAY YES TO ALL OF IT AND WE'RE
TRYING TO GIVE ERIKA I THINK A
CLEARER SENSE OF OF THE STUFF
WE REALLY WANT TO INVEST SOME
TIME AND ENERGY AND POLITICAL
CAPITAL AND SO THE FIRST COUPLE
I THINK RAYMOND RAYMOND, YOU
HAVE THE WHOLE LIST.
>> HAVE YOU BEEN DOCUMENTING
IT?
SO CAN YOU READ IT OUT TO US OR
DO YEAH I CAN EITHER SHARE
SCREEN AND JUST READ THEM OFF
WHATEVER YOUR PREFERENCES WE
SHOULD PROBABLY DO BOTH BECAUSE
THAT IS THE MOST ACCESSIBLE WAY
RIGHT.
I ME OK SO HERE AT THE BOTTOM
AND I'M MOLLY REMIND ME WE DO
HAVE A CALLER WITH THEIR HAND
UP BETHANY AS WE WRAP UP THIS
CONVERSATION I'LL TURN OVER THE
CHAIR TO OK TO OPEN PUBLIC
COMMENT.
>> GREAT.
YEAH SO THE FIRST ONE THAT I
CAPTURED WAS CROSSWALK DESIGN
GUIDELINES AND APPROPRIATENESS.
>> OK, HI ERICA.
THE NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC
CALMING BACKLOG AND PROCESS BY
BOTH ERICA AND JULIE FUNDING
FOR TRANSIT.
SO EVEN THOUGH THINGS THAT
BROUGHT THIS FROM THE STATE
AGENDA, I THINK THERE IS A
CONVERSATION
ABOUT JUST FUNDING
FOR TRANSIT IMPROVEMENTS IN
GENERAL THAT COULD BE PART OF A
LOCAL DISCUSSION AS WELL.
AND THEN THE NO TURN ON RED
DOWNTOWN BY MOLLY BIKE SHARE BY
JIM AND TED RECALL'S OR NO BIG
BUTTONS BY MEGAN.
RIGHT.
OK SO UNFORTUNATELY NOW WE HAVE
TO GO BACK WE HAVE TO HAVE YOU
ON SHARE THE SCREEN SO WE CAN
ACTUALLY SEE EVERYONE'S
RESPONSES SO I'LL JUST READ
THEM OUT AGAIN REAL QUICK AND
WE'LL DO OUR LITTLE THUMBS UP
AS WE GO.
I'VE GOT TO GRAB A SCREENSHOT
REAL QUICK SO CROSSWALK DESIGN
GUIDELINES AND APPROPRIATENESS
HOW MANY THUMBS CAN WE DO?
WE ALL HAVE TO GO SO WE GO WITH
TWO ALTHOUGH I PROBABLY WANT TO
DO MORE BUT THAT MAKES IT HARD.
BUT WE'RE GOING TO TRY AND MAKE
THIS EASIER FOR FOR ERIKA.
SO FOR THOSE OF YOU WHO ALREADY
GAVE ONE, I'LL GIVE YOU A
MOMENT TO CONSIDER IF THAT'S
ONE OF YOUR THUMBS CROSSWALK
DESIGN GUIDELINES AND
APPROPRIATENESS.
I'M LIKE LITERALLY TUCKING MY
THUMBS IN BECAUSE I DON'T
ACCIDENTALLY DO IT.
OK, NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC COMING
BACK AND PROCESS IS A REALLY
GETTING OK IF YOU WANT TO DO ME
A FAVOR BECAUSE I'M LOOKING AT
TWO DIFFERENT SCREENS.
>> IF YOU COULD JUST READ OFF
THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE WHO HAVE
THUMBS UP AND I'LL ADD THAT IS
ONE THREE FIVE FIVE ARE FUNDING
.
OH SO I THINK SUZANNE, IS IT OK
IF WE LEAVE OFF THE FUNDING FOR
TRANSIT WHICH WAS THE STATE
THAT WAS LIKE I THINK THE STATE
ONE IT LOOKS LIKE WE MIGHT HAVE
LOST IS THAT ACTUALLY OK?
I'M GOING TO LEAVE THAT ONE OFF
BECAUSE IT'S STATE AGENDA NO
TURN ON RED DOWNTOWN ONE, TWO,
THREE, FOUR, FIVE FIVE BIKE
SHARE.
I REALLY WANTED TO DO THIS ONE
TO BIKE SHARE.
WE GOT ONLY ONE.
OK, AND PEDESTRIAN RECALLS OK
NO BIKE BUTTONS THE PEDESTRIANS
JUST GET GET A CYCLE JUST ONE I
REALLY I WANT I WANT I WANT I
WANT TO SO SOME OF THOSE THE
PET RECALL THING MAYBE DOESN'T
EVEN NEED TO GO TO COUNCIL
RIGHT.
MAYBE THAT'S JUST THE THING WE
DO MORE OF .
>> YEAH AND MEGAN AND I HAD A
LITTLE BIT OF A SIDEBAR SHE
INDICATED IF YOU'D LIKE WE CAN
COME BACK WITH SOME OF OUR
ENGINEERS TO KIND OF TALK
THROUGH SOME OF THESE
DISCUSSIONS THAT FROM A DESIGN
PERSPECTIVE AND SOME OF THE
TRADE OFFS SO WE IF THAT'S A
REQUEST FOR A FUTURE AGENDA
ITEM, WE CAN DEFINITELY BRING
FORWARD THAT'S FINE WITH ME.
>> AND IF I MAY, I DIDN'T
CAPTURE A NUMBER FOR THE FIRST
CROSSWALK DESIGN GUIDELINES AND
APPROPRIATENESS I THINK I'VE
GOT NONE ONCE WE ONCE WE GOT
THEM FROM BOTH OF THEM AND WE
SAID YOU ONLY GET TWO THUMBS I
THINK OK, I JUST WANTED TO MAKE
SURE THANK YOU.
OK SO ERICA, DO YOU FEEL WAS
THIS USEFUL DO YOU FEEL LIKE
YOU HAVE SOME.
>> I DO AND I MEAN YES IT'S
VERY HELPFUL FOR ME TO JUST GET
A YOU BE ABLE TO HEAR FROM YOU
AT THIS POINT OF THE YEAR, BE
ABLE TO KIND OF IDENTIFY HOW I
SHOULD BE SPENDING MY TIME AND
CONVERSATIONS I SHOULD BE
HAVING WITH WITH STAFF AND
CONVERSATIONS THAT WE SHOULD BE
HAVING IN TERMS OF WHAT WE
COULD BRING BACK TO FOR LONGER
PRESENTATIONS HERE OR WHATNOT.
>> SO THIS IS SUPER HELPFUL.
SO WHAT I CAN DO IS TOMORROW OR
SOMETIME IN THE NEXT DAY OR SO
I'LL LIKE RANK ORDER THEM BASED
ON THE NUMBER OF VOTES THAT
WERE PAD AND THAT'LL MAKE IT
INTO THE MINUTES NEXT MONTH BUT
I'LL GET IT TUNED SO THAT WAY
YOU HAVE IT AT YOUR FINGERTIPS.
>> GREAT.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THIS WAS FUN.
WE DON'T OFTEN HAVE A THING
WHERE WE HEAR FROM EVERYONE ON
COMMISSION AND I APPRECIATED
GETTING TO HEAR A BIT FROM FROM
MOST FOLKS SO THANKS EVERYONE.
AND NOW IT SOUNDS LIKE WE'RE
GOING TO REOPEN PUBLIC COMMENT.
>> WE'VE GOT ONE CALLER.
>> WE DO WE HAVE TWO HANDS THAT
HAVE GONE UP.
OK, BETHANY, I WILL HONOR YOU
FIRST BECAUSE I THINK YOU HAD
YOUR HAND UP FIRST.
SO LET ME GO AHEAD AND ALLOW
YOU TO TALK.
>> SO BETHANY, YOU ARE ALLOWED
TO GO AHEAD NO YOURSELF THE
FLOOR IS YOURS AND RAYMOND, YOU
WANT ME TO KEEP TIME?
>> SURE.
THANK YOU.
>> CAN EVERYONE HEAR ME?
YEP.
WONDERFUL.
THANK YOU FIRST OF ALL FOR
HAVING US AND ALLOWING US TO
LISTEN IN ON ALL THE INSIGHTS.
I WAS CURIOUS IS THERE ANY
DISCUSSION ABOUT THE H.
M GROUP'S REPORT ON THE
POTENTIAL ROUNDABOUT AND MORE
AND SWIFT LONGSHORE AND PIONEER
TRAIL?
I DON'T THINK THAT'S ON AN
AGENDA CURRENTLY.
>> OK, SO THAT'S OK.
THAT'S REALLY MY MAIN CONCERN.
SO I DON'T KNOW IF YOU HAVE ANY
INSIGHTS AND ONE THAT'S GOING
TO BE A TOPIC OF DISCUSSION
JUST BECAUSE WE ARE THE HOUSE
THAT'S RIGHT ON THE CORNER.
SO OBVIOUSLY WE HAVE LOTS
OF THOUGHTS ABOUT IT.
FIRST OF ALL, I'LL SAY WE'RE
THRILLED THAT PEOPLE ARE
LOOKING INTO IT BECAUSE FOR AT
LEAST A DISH I THINK THAT'S HOW
YOU SAY YOUR LAST NAME.
BUT I'VE SENT SO MANY EMAILS
ABOUT TRAFFIC CONCERNS THAT
WE'VE HAD BUT THEN WE'RE ALSO
VERY CONCERNED ABOUT MORE GOING
TO TWO WAY AND WE HAVE SOME
THOUGHTS INPUT ABOUT WHAT COULD
MAKE IT IMPROVED.
SO I WANTED TO KIND OF THROW
THAT THOUGHT OUT THERE AND SEE
IF THERE WAS ANY PLANS AND ONE
THAT WILL BE DISCUSSED TO MAKE
SURE THAT I'M PRESENT.
THANKS SO YEAH.
REYMOND THIS THESE KINDS
OF RECONFIGURATIONS DO OFTEN
COME TO THE COMMISSION AT SOME
POINT FOR A RECOMMENDATION TO
COUNCIL BUT IT'S NOT IT'S NOT
ON MY RADAR CURRENTLY.
>> SO IF YOU ARE CORRECT AND
JUST AS A REMINDER TO THE
COMMISSION WE WE PRESENTED THE
LOWERTOWN STUDY AND ITS FINAL
RECOMMENDATIONS WELL I CAN'T
REMEMBER IF WAS DECEMBER OR
JANUARY BEFORE THE THE FINAL
FINAL PLAN WAS RELEASED.
NOW THAT THE PLAN HAS BEEN
FINALIZED AND POSTED ONLINE,
IT'S BEEN DISTRIBUTED.
SO BETHANY'S REFERRING TO SOME
OF THE FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS IN
THAT.
BUT YOU ALL ARE CORRECT THAT
TYPICALLY FOR A PROJECT SUCH AS
THAT WE WOULD KIND OF COME
BACK, GIVE A PRESENTATION OR
PROBABLY EVEN SOME PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT THAT WOULD BE
INCORPORATED AS PART OF IT.
YOU KNOW, THE LOWERTOWN STUDY
IS KIND OF A YOU KNOW, IT'S A
SUBAREA PLAN, RIGHT?
IT'S KIND OF JUST MEANT TO GIVE
SOME RECOMMENDATIONS.
BUT THEN WHEN WE MOVE AN ACTUAL
PROJECT FORWARD IT WILL GO
THROUGH ITS OWN ENGAGEMENT
PROCESS AND SO THERE WILL BE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR THIS
COMMISSION AS WELL AS THE
PUBLIC TO PROVIDE INPUT INTO
THAT PROJECT AS IT DEVELOPS.
>> RIGHT.
SO IT SOUNDS LIKE, BETHANY,
THERE'S NOTHING IMMINENT BUT
THAT THERE WILL BE FUTURE
OPPORTUNITIES.
IT'S ALSO POSSIBLE TO SIGN UP
FOR UPDATES FROM THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION AND I
BELIEVE YOU WILL THEN DO PEOPLE
GET THE AGENDA LIKE WHAT IS I
DON'T EVEN KNOW ON THOSE
UPDATES BUT THAT'S ANOTHER
POTENTIAL WAY TO SORT OF KEEP
UP WITH WHAT'S WHEN THINGS ARE
COMING TO US PRETTY GOOD.
>> AND NOW WE HAVE A SECOND
CALLER.
ADAM, I HAVE GONE AHEAD AND
ALLOWED YOU TO TALK TO GO AHEAD
AND MEET YOURSELF AND THE FLOOR
IS YOURS.
>> HEY, I'LL BE I'LL BE SUPER
BRIEF BECAUSE I KNOW THIS IS
KIND OF OUT OF ORDER AND ALL
WEIRD BUT JUST FROM FROM THE
LAST DISCUSSION A LOT OF A LOT
OF GREAT IDEAS I THOUGHT I
WOULD JUST KIND OF THROW
SOMETHING OUT THERE THAT'S KIND
OF LIKE A HALF FORMED.
I GUESS IT'S JUST THERE'S A LOT
OF LIKE LITTLE NEIGHBORHOOD CUT
THEROUX'S BETWEEN, YOU KNOW,
KIND GOES THROUGH SOME OF THE
SUPER BLOCKS IN TOWN AND JUST
THEY'RE REALLY HANDY TO HAVE
BUT A LOT FROM OUR IN PRETTY
BAD SHAPE AND KIND
OF DETERIORATING CRUMBLING,
OVERGROWN ET CETERA.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT WOULD REALLY
BE A GOOD MECHANISM FOR THE
CITY TO KIND OF HANDLE THAT BUT
IT WOULD BE GREAT IF SOME
OF THOSE COULD BE I DON'T KNOW
IF IT WOULD BE GOOD FOR THE
CITY TO TO TRY TO ACQUIRE
EASEMENTS ON THEM OR I DON'T
KNOW WHAT WHAT THE BEST WAY
OF HANDLING THAT WOULD BE BUT
IT WOULD BE GREAT IF SOME
OF THOSE WE COULD FIGURE OUT A
WAY TO MAINTAIN THEM BETTER AND
ALSO THINK ABOUT PROPERTY
ENTITIES FOR SNEAKING THEM IN
HERE AND THERE IF THEY'RE NOT
YOU KNOW, IF THERE ISN'T ONE I
KNOW THERE'S SOME KIND
OF WEIRDNESS GETTING THROUGH
FROM LIKE STATE TO MAINE LIKE
YOUR BUSHES THEY'RE GETTING
FROM LIKE UP IN THE AREA AROUND
LIKE PRODUCE STATION OVER NEAR
WHERE BUSH IS IS THAT'S THAT'S
KIND OF A BIT WEIRD TO ENORMOUS
BLACK WITH GOLF COURSES AND
EVERYTHING.
AND I KNOW A LOT OF THEM
PROPERTY THERE.
I DON'T KNOW IF THERE'S A WAY
TO DO THAT.
AND THERE'S THERE'S A CUT
THROUGH IN MY NEIGHBORHOOD OFF
OF PAULENE THAT KIND
OF CONNECTS TO KNOW REALLY A
PRETTY GOOD NORTH SOUTH BIKE
ROUTE THROUGH THROUGH THE
NEIGHBORHOOD AND THERE'S A CUT
THROUGH THROUGH TO PAULENE
THERE.
IT CONNECTS THAT PRETTY WELL
THROUGH TO CYO CHURCH BUT IT'S
YOU KNOW, PRETTY ROUGH.
SO YEAH, I JUST I DON'T KNOW
WHAT THE BEST WAY OF HANDLING
THAT WOULD BE BUT JUST KIND
OF AN IDEA TO THROW OUT THERE.
>> SO THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
AND YEAH JUST TO CLARIFY I
THINK IT BECAME CLEAR AS YOU
WERE TALKING ABOUT YOU'RE
TALKING ABOUT PEDESTRIAN LIKE
THE PEDESTRIAN COVERS THAT ARE
LIKE YEAH SORT OF LIKE THEY
FEEL LIKE A LITTLE SECRET
PATHS.
>> YEAH.
AND I MEAN THE ONE THE ONE IN
MY NEIGHBORHOOD IS IT'S AN
ASPHALT PATH BUT IT'S BASICALLY
GRAVEL DIRT.
IT'S A COMBINATION OF GRAVEL
AND DIRT AND BUCKTHORN.
WELL LIKE
.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THANKS SO MUCH ADAM THAT WE
WERE YOU WERE WE'RE ALMOST A
FEW MINUTES BUT THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
DO WE HAVE ANY OTHER FOLKS
RAISING THEIR HANDS NOW THAT
WE'RE DOING SORT OF IMPROMPTU?
>> TAIMUR MINUTES?
>> NO, NOT THAT I SEE.
>> SO I THINK WE CAN PROBABLY
MOVE ON RIGHT.
SO NEXT UP WE HAVE THE FISCAL
YEAR TWENTY TWENTY THREE BUDGET
PRESENTATIONS OR INVITING IN
OUR CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER
MARTY PACHON TO PRESENT THE
BUDGET.
VERY GOOD.
I JUST PROMOTED MARTY SO GIVE
HER JUST A MOMENT.
THERE SHE IS.
MARTY, JUST A QUICK QUESTION
FOR YOU.
DO YOU WANT TO SHARE YOUR OWN
SCREEN?
BUT I ALSO HAVE YOUR
PRESENTATION UP ON MINE IF YOU
PREFER ME TO JUST DRIVE AND YOU
CAN JUST TALK THROUGH TIME.
>> SO WHATEVER YOUR PREFERENCES
I CAN I CAN SHARE THAT TIME
.
ALL RIGHT.
I MADE YOU COHOSTS SO YOU
SHOULD BE ABLE TO SHARE YOUR
SCREEN NOW
ABLE TO SEE IT OK.
OK
YOU THAT I HAVE NOT HAD THE
PLEASURE OF MEETING MARTY
PACHON, THE CITY'S CHIEF
FINANCIAL OFFICER.
THANK YOU FOR THE OPPORTUNITY
TO DISCUSS THE FISCAL YEAR.
TWENTY THREE PROPOSED BUDGET AS
PRESENTED TO CITY COUNCIL THIS
PAST MONDAY EVENING.
THIS PRESENTATION WILL FOCUS ON
ITEMS THAT MR. HESS'S INDICATED
THE COMMISSION HAS SPECIFIC
INTEREST AS WELL AS OTHER ITEMS
OF SIGNIFICANCE IN THE
TRANSPORTATION AREA
.
>> THE CITY'S PROPOSED FISCAL
TWENTY THREE BUDGET IS FIVE
HUNDRED AND TWENTY FOUR MILLION
DOLLARS COMPRISED OF VARIOUS
TYPES OF FUNDS WITH AND WITHOUT
RESTRICTIONS.
TYPICALLY THE AREA OF GREATEST
FOCUS IS THE GENERAL FUND WHICH
YOU CAN SEE IS TOTALING ONE
HUNDRED AND TWENTY ONE POINT
NINE DOLLARS BILLION OR
APPROXIMATELY TWENTY THREE
PERCENT OF THE OVERALL BUDGET.
>> THE BUDGET AS PROPOSED
MAINTAINS COMPLIANCE WITH THE
CITY'S FUND BALANCE POLICIES
AND THE CITY ALSO CONTINUES TO
MAINTAIN A DOUBLE AA PLUS
GENERAL OBLIGATION BOND RATING
WHICH DEMONSTRATES OUR FISCAL
HOUSE.
THIS IN TURN POSITIONS US WELL
IN THE EVENT WE SEEK TO ISSUE
DEBT LIKE THE RECENT APPROVAL
TO SEEK A ROAD REPAIR BOND
WHICH I'LL ADDRESS MORE LATER
IN THE PRESENTATION.
I'LL TAKE A COUPLE OF MINUTES
TO GO OVER AT FIFTY ONE REVENUE
MR. HAS INDICATED THAT YOU ALL
HAD INTEREST IN SEEING THE
HISTORICAL RECEIPTS OF FIFTY
ONE REVENUE AS YOU CAN SEE
BEGINNING BACK IN FISCAL YEAR
TWENTY EIGHTEEN THROUGH OUR
ESTIMATE OF THIS CURRENT FISCAL
YEAR TWENTY TWO WE SEE A
CONSISTENT RISE IN REVENUE.
THE BLUE PORTION OF THE BAR
REPRESENTS A MAJOR STREET FUND
REVENUE AND THE RED BAR
DEMONSTRATES THE LOCAL STREET
SHARE OF THE FIFTY ONE REVENUE
THE RED PORTION IS ABOUT THREE
MILLION AND FOUR LOCAL STREETS
.
THE BIG PORTION FOR THE MAJOR
STREET VENDORS IS AROUND TEN
MILLION.
TEN POINT SEVEN MILLION FOR
TWENTY THREE IS WHAT WE HAVE
PROJECTED.
>> THE REVENUE IS SHARED BY THE
STATE OF MICHIGAN BASED ON A
FORMULA THAT TAKES INTO ACCOUNT
THE MILES OF ROADS WITHIN THE
CITY AS WELL AS A POPULATION
FACTOR.
I GUESS ONE QUESTION THAT YOU
MIGHT ASK BY LOOKING AT THE
GRAPH IS WHY WE'RE EXPECTING A
DECREASE IN FISCAL YEAR TWENTY
THREE AT THE TIME WE PRESENTED
OUR PREPARED THE BUDGET
GASOLINE PRICES WERE ON THE
RISE AND THEY STILL ARE IN THAT
REALM AT THE MOMENT.
THEREFORE WE TOOK A
CONSERVATIVE APPROACH BECAUSE
NORMALLY WHEN WE SEE PRICES
OF GASOLINE RISE THERE ARE
FEWER GALLONS OF GASOLINE SOLD
.
SO WE TOOK A RATHER
CONSERVATIVE APPROACH AND
DECIDED TO REVERT BACK TO OUR
FISCAL YEAR.
TWENTY NUMBERS AND ANOTHER
THING THAT YOU MIGHT NOTICE IS
THAT WE DID NOT REALLY SEE A
DECREASE IN REVENUE WHEN GAS
TAX REVENUE DURING COVID EITHER
DURING THE SHUTDOWN PERIOD OR
THE FOLLOWING COVID WORK FROM
HOME ERA IT DIDN'T REALLY SEEM
TO IMPACT THE REVENUES RECEIVED
HERE WHICH REALLY WAS A GOOD
THING ON THE NEXT SLIDE WE'LL
JUST TALK ABOUT HOW WE SPEND
THAT ACCEPTING ONE ALLOCATION
FOR FISCAL YEAR TWENTY THREE
OUR EXPENDITURE BUDGET IS ABOUT
THIRTY MILLION.
THE FIRST CATEGORY THAT WE CALL
OTHER INCLUDES COSTS ASSOCIATED
WITH THINGS LIKE CUSTOMER
SERVICE SYSTEMS PLANNING, ASSET
MANAGEMENT, SELF-INSURED
RETIREE COST, LEGAL SUPPORT AND
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION IN THE
CATEGORY OF THIS REPRESENTS THE
ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION FUND
AND THIS NUMBER HERE IN THIS
CASE REPRESENTS THE ANNUAL
AMOUNT THAT IS TRANSFERRED OVER
TO THE ALTERNATIVE
TRANSPORTATION FUND WHICH IS A
SEPARATE FUND IN OUR BOOKS.
THIS DOES NOT INCLUDE SERVICES
THAT ARE PROVIDED UNDER THE
TRAFFIC CONTROL OR RIGHT AWAY
CATEGORIES SUCH AS PEDESTRIAN
SIGNAL MAINTENANCE, RFP
INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE
ALONG WITH THINGS LIKE BIKE
LANE PLOWING AND SWEEPING THAT
OCCURS OF NORMAL ROAD
MAINTENANCE.
HISTORICALLY THE CONTRIBUTION
TO THE FUND HAS BEEN ABOUT FIVE
PERCENT BACK FIFTY ONE.
HOWEVER IN RECENT YEARS WE'VE
HAD TO ESCALATE THAT
CONTRIBUTION DUE TO RISING
COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH TYPICALLY
PROTECTED BIKE LANE MAINTENANCE
WHICH WAS MORE THAN WE HAD
ANTICIPATED.
AND THEN WE ALSO HAD A LARGE
INVESTMENT IN THE PROJECT LAST
YEAR.
SO WE'RE SEEING THAT
CONTRIBUTION RISE IN THE
CATEGORY OF DEBT SERVICE.
YOU'LL FIND THE BROADWAY BRIDGE
PROJECT DEBT SERVICE AS WELL AS
A SHARE OF THE WHEELER FACILITY
DEBT SERVICE.
THIS DEBT SERVICE WILL ALSO
INCLUDE THE PROJECTED ISSUANCE
AS WELL UNDER THE TRAFFIC
CONTROL CATEGORY WE SEE TRAFFIC
SIGNAL AND SIGN MAINTENANCE AND
ALSO PAYMENT MARKINGS AND THEN
BY THE LARGEST CATEGORY AS YOU
CAN SEE THE GRAPH HERE IS THE
RIGHT AWAY CATEGORY WHICH
REPRESENTS ABOUT SEVENTY THREE
PERCENT THE BUDGET THIS
PARTICULAR FISCAL YEAR.
THIS INCLUDES ABOUT NINE
MILLION DOLLARS OF BOND
PROCEEDS AS WELL AS USE OF FUND
BALANCE FOR ROAD RESEARCH
SINGING AND CAPITAL MAINTENANCE
.
SOME AREAS OF INTEREST THAT
WERE INCLUDED IN THIS YEAR'S
BUDGET INCLUDE A PROJECT FOR
ACCESSIBLE PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS,
CROSSWALK UPGRADES, PEDESTRIAN
SAFETY LIGHTING ENHANCEMENTS,
SIDEWALK GAP ELIMINATIONS, BIKE
LANE ENHANCEMENTS, SIDEWALK
REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT AND THE
ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION
BUDGET INCLUDES A COUPLE
OF PROJECTS THAT INSTALL BIKE
LANES FOR A TOTAL OF FIVE POINT
ONE MILLION DOLLARS.
THESE PROJECTS ARE SCATTERED
THROUGHOUT THE BUDGET AND ARE
IN DIFFERENT AREAS OF FUNDING
SOURCES.
AS I LISTEN TO YOUR
CONVERSATION, I HEARD SOME
CONVERSATION ABOUT TRAFFIC
COMING IN THIS YEAR'S BUDGET.
WE WERE ABLE TO INCREASE THE
PROGRAM FUNDING TO A TOTAL
OF TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIVE
WHICH IS ABOUT ONE HUNDRED OR
SO MORE THOUSAND DOLLARS AND WE
HAVE ANNUALLY BEEN ALLOCATED TO
THAT EFFORT.
SO WE ARE HOPEFUL THAT WE'LL BE
ABLE TO ADDRESS SOME OF THE
PROJECT BACKLOG OF TRAFFIC
CALMING USUALLY COINCIDES WITH
OUR ANNUAL RESURFACING PROGRAM.
SO THOSE PROJECTS TYPICALLY
TAKE PLACE ALONG WITH THAT
CONTRACT.
I ALSO HAVE CONVERSATIONS ABOUT
SIDEWALKS SNOW ALSO THIS YEAR'S
BUDGET WE KICKED OFF A PILOT
PROGRAM THAT IS VOLUNTEER BASED
AND WILL BE COORDINATED BY OUR
THREE SIX OF OUR PARKS AREA.
IT WILL ALIGN VOLUNTEERS WITH
ELDERLY OR DISABLED INDIVIDUALS
WHO NEED HELP CLEARING THE SNOW
FROM OUR WALKS.
>> THERE'S ALSO A COMPONENT
OF THE COUNTY MENTAL HEALTH
MILLAGE THE TWENTY PERCENT
ALLOCATION TOWARDS PEDESTRIAN
SAFETY IS ADOPTED BY CITY
COUNCIL THIS ITEMIZES THE
TWENTY PERCENT SHARE OF THAT
ANTICIPATED REVENUE FIVE
HUNDRED AND FORTY THOUSAND TWO
HUNDRED AND THIRTY ONE THOUSAND
TO CONTINUE OUR STREETLIGHT
REPLACEMENT PROGRAM ONE HUNDRED
AND THIRTY FIVE THOUSAND THAT
WE HAVE BEEN SENDING OVER FOR
CROSSWALK LIGHTING CREATES A
SMALL INSURANCE APPLICATION AND
AND FINALLY A OUTREACH AND
EDUCATION CATEGORY THAT WE ALSO
USE AS A CONTINGENCY SHOULD WE
GET INTO A SITUATION WHERE WE
ARE WE'RE OUT OF MONEY FOR
UNCONTROLLED CROSSWALKS AS
WE'RE OFTEN AT THE MERCY OF THE
TIMING.
SOMETIMES IT'S SO SOMETIMES WE
UTILIZE THIS TEMPORARILY TO GET
SOME LIGHTING INSTALLED FOR
ROAD MAINTENANCE THIS UPCOMING
SEASON ENGINEERING HAS A PLAN
TO RESURFACE ELEVEN POINT ONE
MILES AND THEN CAPITAL
MAINTENANCE WILL BE CONDUCTED
ON TWENTY FIVE POINT ONE MILES
.
THE GOAL FOR PAVEMENT STILL
REMAINS AT 80 PERCENT OF ROADS
TO BE GOOD, GOOD OR BETTER
CONDITION BY TWENTY TWENTY SIX
AND WE FOUND THAT EFFORT BY
VARIOUS FUNDING SOURCES
INCLUDING OUR STREET
MILEAGE AT
FIFTY ONE REVENUES LAST YEAR
OUR COUNTY ROAD MILEAGE, THE
BOND PROCEDURE THAT WE INTEND
TO ISSUE GRANTS AND OTHER
SOURCES AND WE TYPICALLY LIKE
TO LEVERAGE THIS WORK WITH
PARTNERS IN THE AREA SHOULD WE
BE ABLE TO DO SO?
>> AS I INDICATED CITY COUNCIL
JUST APPROVED AT THE APRIL 18TH
MEETING THE INITIATIVE TO MOVE
FORWARD WITH THE BOND
INITIATIVE THAT WAS INTRODUCED
DURING OUR DECEMBER BUDGET
PLANNING SESSION TO CITY
COUNCIL WE RECEIVED SIGNIFICANT
POSITIVE FEEDBACK REGARDING
THAT INITIATIVE.
SO WE HAVE MOVED FORWARD WITH
THAT PROCESS.
WE INTEND TO ISSUE A BOND THAT
TOTALS ABOUT FIFTEEN MILLION
DOLLARS.
WE'LL PAY THAT FIFTEEN MILLION
DOLLAR DEBT SERVICE FROM THREE
FUNDS LISTED HERE THE MAJOR
LOCAL STREET BOND AS WELL AS
THE STREET BRIDGE AND SIDEWALK
MILEAGE.
>> THE NEXT STEPS TO BE
UNDERTAKEN BY OUR ENGINEERING
UNIT WILL BE TO PROVIDE A
REVISED SCHEDULE, DEVELOP THE
CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE AND
COMMUNICATION STRATEGY TO LET
FOLKS KNOW THAT HOW WE ARE
SPENDING THESE BOND PROCEEDS
AND THAT'S ALL I HAVE.
>> IF THERE'S ANY QUESTIONS I'M
HAPPY TO ENTERTAIN THEM.
THANK YOU.
>> IF YOU COULD GO AHEAD AND
SHARE YOUR SCREEN AND FIND IT
EASIER TO SEE WHO'S RAISING
YOUR HAND AT THIS POINT I THINK
THE RIGHT HAND BUTTON IS
WORKING PRETTY WELL SO BUT I
SEE THAT YOU GO AHEAD.
>> THANK YOU.
THE AD FIFTY ONE SLIDES WE
SPEND SOME TIME LOOKING AT THE
REVENUE IS AROUND THIRTEEN
POINT SEVEN BILLION I THINK
THIRTEEN THIRTEEN DECIMATED BY
THE NEXT SLIDE THE EXPENDITURES
THE FIFTY ONE EXPENDITURES WERE
AROUND THIRTY MILLION.
CAN YOU EXPLAIN THE DESCRIPT
AND SEE AS I INDICATED THAT
WILL INCLUDE SOME BOND PROCEEDS
AS WELL AS YOSSEF ON BALANCE
OF BOTH FUNDS TO GET US UP TO
THE THIRTY MILLION GIFT.
OTHER QUESTION
I'M EXCITED
ABOUT THE INCREASED TRAFFIC
COMING.
I DIDN'T KNOW THAT THAT WAS
COMING THIS YEAR
.
>> JULIE THE THE TRAFFIC COMING
MUIZ ULPANA NEIGHBORHOOD FOR
ME IS THAT RIGHT.
SO IS IT IS THERE ANY MONEY
DEDICATED TO MAJOR STREETS COMI
NOT NEW MONEY.
THERE'S STILL THE MONEY THAT
WAS ALLOCATED DURING LAST
YEAR'S BUDGET CYCLE THAT HAS
YET TO BE EXPANDED SO THERE
ISN'T ANY NEW NEW FUNDING ADDED
TO THAT EFFORT AT THIS POINT.
>> THANK YOU.
YOU'RE WELCOME.
JUST A FURTHER CLARIFY THAT IF
I MAY YOU THAT MONEY THAT WAS
IN LAST YEAR'S BUDGET WILL ROLL
OVER TO THIS NEXT YEAR SO THAT
WE CAN CONTINUE TO WORK ON IT
AND THAT IS TO REALLY WORK ON
THE PROCESS AND PROJECT ID BUT
WE DON'T NECESSARILY HAVE A
DEDICATED LIKE CAPITAL STREAM
FOR IT YET BECAUSE WE'RE KIND
OF WAITING FOR THAT PROCESS
ROLL OUT AND GET DEVELOPED AND
THEN YOU CLOSE YOUR EARS.
MAYBE THAT'LL BE PART OF THE
NEXT KLEP BUDGET TO NOT FIFTY
OR TWENTY THREE BUT FISCAL YEAR
WE GO INTO ANOTHER BIENNIUM
BUDGET IN TWENTY FOUR TWENTY
FIVE THAT MIGHT BE A GOOD TIME
FOR US TO PRESENT SOME PROJECTS
EITHER THROUGH THE SIPI AND OR
THROUGH THE BUDGET PROCESS FOR
CONSIDERATION BY ME AND I HAVE
A QUESTION THAT'S MAYBE MORE
FOR RAYMOND AND NICK THAN FOR
MARTY BUT SEEING THE THE ROAD
BOND WHICH IS GOING TO BE LIKE
BRINGING THINGS DOING A LOT
OF WORK TO TO UPGRADE UPDATE
STREETS MORE QUICKLY I'M
CURIOUS ABOUT AND ALSO TALKING
ABOUT HOW THAT'S THE SAME
CONTRACT FOR ROAD RESURFACING
AND THE TRAFFIC COMING.
I'M WONDERING IF THERE'S ANY
POSSIBILITY OF INTEGRATING
COMING INTO THE SORT OF THE
ROAD LIKE THE NEW ROAD WORK
THAT'S GOING BE HAPPENING.
I KNOW WE LOOK AT THINGS LIKE
ADDING BIKE LANES AND OFTEN
THERE'S LIKE A ROAD DIET THAT
HAPPENS BUT I WONDER ABOUT
INCORPORATING OTHER POTENTIAL
COMING METHODS IN IN THOSE
PROJECTS THAT ARE ALREADY
HAPPENING OR GOING TO BE
HAPPENING.
WE DO SOME LITTLE THINGS HERE
AND THERE.
I MEAN WE'VE DONE SOME BUMP
OUTS AND THINGS LIKE THAT BUT
THE THE THE MOST COMMON TRAFFIC
CALMING DEVICE THAT GETS USED
IS THE VERTICAL ELEMENTS.
THE SPEED CABLES AND THE SPEED
HUMPS AND THOSE NEED TO GO
THROUGH THE THE TRAFFIC CALMING
PROGRAM SPECIFICALLY.
BUT WE WE DO WORK IN A FEW
THINGS HERE AND THERE WHERE WE
HEAR OF DESIRE AND NEED FOR
THEM.
>> OK, IS I WONDER ABOUT THINGS
LIKE I MEAN CONTINUOUS
SIDEWALKS IS A THING THAT I
KNOW IS IN THE VISION THE THE
NEW YEAR.
YEAH.
VISION ZERO PLAN AND YEAH JUST
SORT OF AS WE HAVE THIS LIKE
EXPANDED PALETTE OF POSSIBILE
IS NOW AND I'M CURIOUS ABOUT
HOW WE GET TO START USING THEM
.
YEAH YOU MENTIONED SIDEWALKS
AND I MEAN WE'RE IN A SIDEWALK
GAP PRIORITIZATION.
WE LOOK TO SEE WHERE THERE'S
PLACES WHERE WE MIGHT ALIGN
STREETS THAT WE'RE PLANNING TO
RESURFACE WITH.
YOU KNOW, IF IF SOME OF THOSE
THAT ARE ON OUR SERVICING LIST
HAVE HIGH PRIORITY SIDEWALK
GAPS ON IT, WE'LL WORK THEM
INTO THAT PROGRAM AS WELL WHEN
WE GET THE OPPORTUNITY TO DO
THAT.
>> YEAH, I WAS I WAS THINKING
MORE ABOUT LIKE WHERE THE
CROSSWALK IS THE SAME HEIGHT AS
THE SIDEWALK AND CARS HAVE TO
GO WHICH I THINK IS SOMETIMES
OK.
IT'S A RACE CROSSWALK.
YEAH.
>> AGAIN THAT'S A VERTICAL
ELEMENT THAT DOES HAVE TO GO
THROUGH THE THROUGH THE TRAFFIC
COMING PROGRAM.
>> OK, SPECIFICALLY ERIKA,
MAYBE WE CAN ADD THAT TO OUR
LIST IS MAKING IT SO WE CAN DO
THOSE THINGS WITHOUT PUTTING
THEM THROUGH THE TRAFFIC
COMING.
>> MY THOUGHT IS IF WE'RE
REVISITING TRAFFIC COMING
PROCESS WE MIGHT TALK ABOUT
WHAT WHAT ELEMENTS THAT MIGHT
BE A CONVERSATION THAT WE MIGHT
HAVE AS A BODY.
YEAH, COOL.
AND STAFF MIGHT PROVIDE INPUT
ON WHICH IS WHICH ARE WHICH ARE
WHICH IS BENEFICIAL WHICH IS
NOT YEAH BUT BRING US BACK TO
THE BUDGET.
OTHER BUDGET QUESTIONS THIS
MIGHT BE SPECIFIC BUT SO THE
CURRENT FISCAL YEAR HAS MONEY
ALLOCATED FOR A QUICK BUILD
PROJECTS AND JUST MORE BROADLY
SPEAKING, YOU KNOW, IS THERE
ANY WAY TO BETTER UNDERSTAND
FROM WHAT WHAT YOU'VE SHOWN AND
WHAT EFFECT HAVING OUR NEW
TRANSPORTATION PLAN THAT WAS
JUST APPROVED?
IS THERE ANYTHING YOU CAN POINT
TO IN THE BUDGET THAT SAYS
HERE'S HERE'S SOME MONEY FOR
THE QUICK BUILDS THAT ARE
MENTIONED IN THE NEW
TRANSPORTATION PLAN OR OTHER
INITIATIVES THAT THAT ARE
COMING OUT THAT RECENTLY
APPROVED PLAN THAT CAN BE
REFLECTED ANYWHERE IN WHAT
YOU'VE SHOWN US FROM MY
STANDPOINT WHAT WE USE TO
DEVELOP A BUDGET, OUR REQUEST
FROM STAFF OR WHAT IS PRESENTED
IN THE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS
PLAN WE WERE ABLE TO
INCORPORATE ALL THOSE REQUESTS
AND ANYTHING THAT IN IN THE
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.
SO FROM MY STANDPOINT I CAN'T
SAY SPECIFICALLY IF THINGS ARE
INCLUDED THAT ARE IN LINE WITH
THAT PLAN THAT WAS ADOPTED THAT
PERHAPS RAYMOND WOULD BE BETTER
SUITED TO ANSWER THAT QUESTION
.
YEAH, WELL I READ I THINK THE
GOOD NEWS HERE IS THAT YOU'RE
GOING TO STEAL A LITTLE THUNDER
HERE BUT COUNCIL DID APPROVE
THE ARPA PROJECT AT THEIR LAST
MEETING AND INCLUDED IN THAT IS
TWO MILLION DOLLARS FOR VISION
ZERO IMPLEMENTATION TO DO
EXACTLY THE TYPES OF PROJECT
THAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT THE
QUICK BUILD.
SO THE IDEA WAS ERIKA SPONSORED
AMENDMENT AS PART OF LAST
YEAR'S BUDGET THAT PUT SOME
WE'LL CALL IT SEED MONEY
STARTER MONEY FOR VISION
IMPLEMENTATION AND WE ARE
DILIGENTLY WORKING ON THAT.
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE A
PRESENTATION ON THAT IN JUST A
SECOND AND THEN WE PUT FORWARD
THIS OTHER PROJECT TO KIND
OF KEEP THE MOMENTUM GOING SO
TWO MILLION DOLLARS SHOULD BE
ABLE TO STRETCH THIS OUT OVER A
COUPLE OF YEARS AND WE HAVE
ROUGHLY SIX HUNDRED THOUSAND
DOLLARS THEREABOUTS.
SO IF WE TAKE THAT TWO MILLION
DOLLARS AND SPREAD IT OUT OVER
THREE OR FOUR YEARS THEN THAT
KIND OF KEEPS THAT SAME LEVEL
OF FUNDING AND QUICK BUILD
PROJECTS ARE A LITTLE BIT LESS
EXPENSIVE THAN A MAJOR CAPITAL
PROJECT AND THEN AS YOU'VE
ALWAYS HEARD ME SAY BEFORE, WE
WILL LOOK TO PIGGYBACK OFF
OF SOME OF THOSE RESURFACING
PROJECTS THAT BOTH MARTY AND
NICK ALLUDED TO EARLIER THAT
THERE'S PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE
OR THINGS LIKE THAT AND THERE'S
AN OPPORTUNITY FOR US TO
SQUEEZE IN A BIKE LANE OR YOU
KNOW, BUMP OUT OR WHATEVER TO
BRING SOME ADDITIONAL SAFETY
AND OTHER ENHANCEMENTS WE CAN
CAN LOOKING TO DO THAT TOO.
SO IT'S SORT OF A MULTIFACETED
APPROACH.
THERE ISN'T NECESSARILY ONE
SINGLE POT OF FUNDING THAT WE
TAP INTO.
WE TRY TO GO OFF OF EXISTING
PROJECTS AND THEN USE MAYBE
THIS ARPA MONEY AND WE EVEN
HAVE OTHER SPENDING REQUESTS
FOR OTHER SOURCES OF FUNDING
FROM EXTERNAL SOURCES AS WELL
.
ALL RIGHT.
WELL, I'M NOT SEEING OTHER
QUESTIONS.
THIS WAS AN INCREDIBLY HELPFUL
CONVERSATION.
I REALLY APPRECIATED HOW YOU
PULLED TOGETHER ALL OF THE
DIFFERENT FUNDING SOURCES THAT
WE COULD GET A COMPLETE PICTURE
OF TRANSPORTATION EXPENDITURES
IN THIS YEAR'S BUDGET.
I THINK THIS WAS REALLY GREAT.
SO THANK YOU, MARTY.
THANK YOU.
>> ALL RIGHT.
AND WE ARE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
ZERO IMPLEMENTATION PLAN.
SO AT OUR LAST MEETING WE WERE
GOING TO TALK ABOUT THE
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT WERE
COMING OUT OF THE
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN INITIATIVE
AND I THINK REYMOND IS GOING TO
WALK US THROUGH SOME OF THOSE.
BUT THEN THERE WAS ALSO A
COMMITTEE THIS IS SEPARATE FROM
THE COMMITTEE SINCE THE
COMMITTEE HASN'T MET THAT ON
THE AGENDA WILL PROBABLY BYPASS
THAT TO A CERTAIN DEGREE
BECAUSE WHAT I'M ABOUT TO SHOW
YOU IS WHAT THEY DISCUSSED AT
THEIR LAST MEETING WHICH IS IN
FEBRUARY WE HAD TENTATIVELY
SCHEDULED A MEETING TODAY BUT
DUE TO THE CONFLICT WITH
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION WE
THOUGHT IT WAS BEST TO
RESCHEDULE THAT.
SO WE HAVE A CALL WITH THE
CONSULTANT TO FIGURE OUT THE
NEXT MEETING DATE.
SO WHAT I WILL JUST QUICKLY
HIGHLIGHT IS THE PRESENTATION.
I'M GOING TO QUICKLY GO OVER
THE EXCERPT OR A SUBSET OF THE
ENTIRE PRESENTATION.
IT GIVES A LOT OF THE
BACKGROUND AND JUSTIFICATION
AND PROCESS THAT WENT INTO
THIS.
I'LL KIND OF SKIP PAST ALL
OF THAT AND JUST GET TO THE
MEAT AND POTATOES WHICH IS THE
LOCATIONS AND SOME OF THE
TREATMENTS THAT ARE BEING
CONSIDERED WITH THIS FIRST POT
OF MONEY THAT WE GOT FROM ERIKA
AS PART OF THAT BUDGET PROCESS.
>> SO AGAIN, AS YOU MAY RECALL
,THE TRANSPORTATION PLAN, THE
MOVING TOGETHER TOWARDS VISION
ZERO HAS IDENTIFIED IN IT THESE
TIER ONE AND TIER TWO
INTERSECTIONS AND TIER ONE AND
TIER TWO CORRIDOR AND TIER
THOSE TEARS REFERRED TO KIND
OF SAFETY CONCERN AREAS.
AND SO WHAT WE DID IS WORKING
WITH THE SALT AND WE AGAIN TRY
TO BE VERY DATA DRIVEN.
WE LOOKED AT WHICH AREAS KIND
OF COULD BENEFIT FROM SOME
NEAR-TERM IMPROVEMENTS.
I WILL SAY WE DID ELIMINATE
SOME LOCATIONS FOR
CONSIDERATION BASED ON MAYBE
CERTAIN LEVELS OF COMPLEXITY.
SO MY FRIENDS AT MIT WHO MIGHT
BE LISTENING WE AVOIDED
ANYTHING ON AN END TRUNK LINE
JUST BECAUSE WE THOUGHT WE
WOULDN'T BE ABLE TO IMPLEMENT
THE PROJECT THIS FISCAL YEAR IF
WE HAD TO GET A WHOLE BUNCH
OF STATE APPROVALS AND THEN IN
A SIMILAR VEIN, IF THERE WAS A
CAPITAL PROJECT THAT WAS
PROGRAMS IN THE NEXT YEAR OR SO
WE DIDN'T WANT TO HAVE TO UNDO
WHATEVER WE DID.
WE'D RATHER WORK THROUGH THAT
PROJECT TO LOOK AT
OPPORTUNITIES FOR IMPROVEMENT.
>> SO THESE ARE THE THINGS THAT
ROSE TO THE TOP WITH ALL THOSE
CONSIDERATIONS IN MIND FOR
INTERSECTIONS WE ARE HONING IN
ON GLENANNE FULLER AND SOUTH
UNIVERSITY AND STATE AND THEN
FOR CORRIDOR'S A SECTION
OF PACARD BETWEEN MAINE AND
STATE A SECTION OF WASHINGTON
BETWEEN MAINE AND FLETCHER
SECTION OF NORTH MAPLE FROM 14
TO JACKSON AND A SECTION OF AND
FROM MAINE TO FOURTH.
SO TAKING A LITTLE BIT OUT
OF ORDER WHAT I'LL DO IS JUST
QUICKLY HIGHLIGHT WHAT WENT
INTO THAT.
THIS IS AN OVERVIEW SLIDE SO
WE'LL GO INTO THE MORE DETAILED
SLIDES.
SO FOR WASHINGTON STREETS FROM
DENHA FLETCHER THE IDEA IS WE
SAW SOME CRASHES INVOLVING
PEDESTRIANS.
THERE WERE SOME HEAD LEFT TURN
CRASHES AND JUST THE VOLUME
OF CRASHES KIND OF STOOD OUT
AND SO SOME OF THE STRATEGIES
ARE TO INCREASE VISIBILITY.
PEDESTRIANS AND RIDERS REDUCED
TURNING SPEEDS AND THAT'LL BE
ACCOMPLISHED BY A SERIES
OF BUMPASS WITH PAINT AND
HARDENED CENTERLINE HARDENED
CENTER LINES ARE GOING TO BE A
FAIRLY NEW TREATMENT FOR US.
SO WE'RE STILL KIND OF THINKING
THROUGH WHAT THAT MIGHT EXACTLY
ENTAIL.
SOME OF YOU MIGHT BE FAMILIAR
WITH THE CONCEPT IN OTHER
COMMUNITIES THAT REALLY THE
IDEA IS TO REDUCE THE SPEED
OF VEHICLES.
THEY MAKE A TURN SO THAT THEY
DON'T KIND OF CUT THE CORNER
AND TAKE THESE TURNS TO HIGH
SPEED SO YOU YOU CAN PUT SOME
SORT OF VERTICAL DEVICE THERE
ALONG THE DOUBLE YELLOW LINE OR
ON THE RECEIVING APPROACH TO
MAKE SURE THAT KIND OF THAT
VEHICLES TAKE THAT TURN A
LITTLE BIT MORE JUDICIOUSLY AND
THEN JUST TO SHOW YOU THAT THIS
WAS DATA DRIVEN, I WON'T GO
INTO A LOT OF DETAILS ON A LOT
OF THIS STUFF.
BUT YOU KNOW WHAT?
WE'RE REALLY TRYING TO FOCUS IN
ON WHAT TYPES OF INJURIES
OCCURRED, WHAT WERE THE TYPE
OF CRASH SITES TO MAKE SURE
THAT THE COUNTERMEASURE THAT
WE'RE PROPOSING IS ADEQUATE TO
HOPEFULLY ADDRESS SOME OF THE
PROBLEMS THAT WE'VE SEEN OUT
THERE.
SO NEXT I'LL FOCUS ON PACARD
FROM MAINE TO ST. SO THERE IS A
MISSING SECTION OF BICYCLE LANE
FOR THOSE OF YOU THAT OCCURRED,
I'M SURE YOU'VE EXPERIENCED
THIS THAT THE BIKE LANE KIND
OF DROPS WHEN YOU GET TO STATE.
SO THE IDEA IS THAT THERE'S
ENOUGH ROOM OUT THERE FOR US TO
BE ABLE TO PUT ONE IN.
AND SO AGAIN LOOKING AT THE
VOLUME OF CRASHES AND CRASHES
INVOLVING CYCLISTS AND ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT WE CAN DO TO
REDUCE VEHICLE SPEED BY
NARROWING THOSE LANES AND
PUTTING IN A HIGH COMFORT LIKE
FACILITY.
>> AND SO THIS IS THE SORT
OF TREATMENT WE'RE LOOKING AT.
I MEAN THIS IS AN EXACT FORM
BUT SOME SORT OF PROTECTED
BICYCLE FACILITY WITH A
VERTICAL ELEMENT.
AND THEN YOU ALSO SEE DOWN HERE
THERE'S SOME OPPORTUNITY FOR US
TO MAYBE TIGHTEN UP SOME OF THE
TURNING RADII TO AGAIN SLOW
DOWN VEHICLES AS THEY MAKE
THOSE TURNS IN THIS INSTANCE
THOMPSON STREET AND PACKARD AND
SOME OF THOSE INTERSECTIONS TO
BE EVALUATED ON A KIND
OF INTERSECTION BY INTERSECTION
BASIS GOING THROUGH THIS
QUARTER MAPLE ROAD, SIMILAR
SORT OF SITUATION WHERE WE HAVE
VARYING LEVELS OF BIKE
FACILITY.
THERE MIGHT BE AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR US TO ADD PROTECTED LANES
BY HAVING SOME SORT OF VERTICAL
ELEMENT.
>> YOU KNOW, THERE'S A SMALL
BUFFER ON THAT SECTION MAYBE SO
WITH AND THERE AREN'T A LOT
OF DRIVE CUTS SO THERE MIGHT BE
AN OPPORTUNITY FOR US TO PUT IN
THOSE VERTICAL ELEMENTS.
ONE THING THAT I WILL KNOW A
SIDEBAR RELATED TO ANY OF THESE
VERTICAL ELEMENTS WE ARE IN
DISCUSSIONS RIGHT NOW WITH
PUBLIC WORKS ABOUT THEIR STREET
SWEEPING AND WINTER MAINTENANCE
EQUIPMENT RIGHT NOW THE
FACILITIES THAT YOU SEE
DOWNTOWN SUCH AS I'M WILLIAM ON
THE VISION ON FIRST AND THE ONE
THAT'S GOING IN ON CATHERINE
MILLER THOSE ARE THOSE BY
DIRECTIONAL CYCLE TRACK AND THE
BENEFIT OF THOSE ESPECIALLY
FROM MAINTENANCE PERSPECTIVE IS
THEY CAN GET A FULL SIZE
VEHICLE IN WHETHER IT BE A FULL
SIZE SWEEPER OR A FULL SIZED
PLOW TO CLEAR THOSE FACILITIES
.
WHEN WE START TALKING ABOUT
BIKE LANES, THE MORE
TRADITIONAL BIKE LANES WHETHER
ONE ON EACH SIDE OF THE
ROADWAY, IT WOULD REQUIRE A
SMALLER PIECE OF EQUIPMENT IF
WE WERE TO KEEP THE VERTICAL
ELEMENTS IN YEAR ROUND.
SO AGAIN, THESE POSTS ARE GOING
TO STAY IN YEAR ROUND.
WE NEED TO MAKE SURE THAT THE
EQUIPMENT CAN GET IN THERE TO
CLEAR THOSE PATHS.
SO WE ARE TRYING TO FIND A
SOLUTION AND WORKING WITH
PUBLIC WORKS ON WHAT THAT PIECE
OF EQUIPMENT WOULD LOOK LIKE
AND WHAT'S ON THE MARKET.
AND WE ALSO ON A SIDE BAR THE
CITY IS PURSUING A GREEN FLEET
APPROACH TO ALL OF OUR NEW
VEHICLES SO NOT ONLY DO WE NEED
THE RIGHT SIZE VEHICLE BUT WE
NEED TO MAKE SURE IT'S KIND
OF ZERO EMISSION VEHICLE AND
IT'S ELECTRIC AS WELL.
SO TRYING TO CHECK ALL THE
BOXES THAT WE CAN TO MAKE SURE
THAT THIS WORKS.
SO AGAIN, THE STRATEGY WOULD D
VEHICLE SPEEDS AND INCREASE
COMFORT FOR CYCLISTS.
GLENN FULLER.
WE'RE SEEING SOME CRASHES AND
INVOLVING CYCLISTS AND THEN
THERE'S ALSO SOME CRASHES
INVOLVING VEHICLES ESPECIALLY
LEFT TURNING VEHICLES.
AND SO SOME OF THE STRATEGIES
HERE TO REDUCE SPEED IS KIND
OF AROUND THIS BEND, ESPECIALLY
AROUND THE VEHICLES THAT ARE
TURNING ONTO FULLER AND
INCREASED VISIBILITY
OF CYCLISTS.
SO THAT MIGHT BE SOME PAVEMENT
MARKINGS.
SO FOR EXAMPLE, YOU HAVE THE
GREEN PIGMENT SHARED LANE
MARKINGS THROUGH THE
INTERSECTION, MAYBE SOME HARD
AND CENTER LINE TO REDUCE THE
SPEED OF VEHICLES AND THEN A
HARD AND CENTER LINE WITH A
PAINT AND POST MEDIAN AND ALSO
REDUCE THAT TURNING RADIUS
AGAIN YOU CAN KIND OF SEE SOME
OF THE DATA THAT WENT INTO
THOSE CONSIDERATION YOU AND
STATE IS ANOTHER LOCATION.
THIS IS PROBABLY NOT A
SURPRISE.
IT'S JUST A VERY HIGH VOLUME
INTERSECTION ESPECIALLY IN A
LOT OF PEDESTRIANS AND
CYCLISTS.
SO THE QUESTION IS WHAT ARE THE
THINGS THAT WE CAN DO?
THIS IS AND ALWAYS TOP
CONDITION.
SO ONE OF THE THINGS WE CAN DO
TO SIMPLIFY THE INTERSECTION
AND PRIORITIZE THE PEDESTRIAN
AND BICYCLE TRAVEL SO SOME
OF THE THINGS THAT WE'RE
THINKING ABOUT DOING IS MAYBE
REMOVING THE TURN LANES AND ADD
SOME BUMP OUTS OR PEDESTRIAN
REFUGE ISLAND STYLE TYPE THINGS
DEPENDING UPON WHICH FITS AND
THEN SOME HARD AND CENTER LINE
AS WELL TO KIND OF GIVE THAT
TRAFFIC CALMING EFFECT ON THIS
ROADWAY.
>> I WILL NOTE TO BRIAN WHO'S
ON THE CALL WE OBVIOUSLY THIS
IS A VERY HEAVILY USED TRANSIT
CORRIDOR SO WE WANT TO MAKE
SURE THAT THE SOLUTIONS WE COME
UP WITH ON STATE, YOU KNOW,
DON'T NEGATIVELY IMPACT TRANSIT
OPERATIONS.
SO WE WOULD BE SURE TO
COORDINATE WITH THE RIDE AND
EVEN BLUE BUSSES UNIVERSITY
BUSSES USE THIS ROUTE PRETTY
EXTENSIVELY AS WELL TO MAKE
SURE THAT THEIR OPERATIONS ARE
MAINTAINED THROUGH HERE LIBERTY
AND STADIUM.
AGAIN, SOME CONCERNS OUT HERE
ARE SOME HEAD ON THE LEFT TURN
CRASHES.
THE VOLUME OF CRASHES WAS
PARTICULARLY HIGH, SOME CRASHES
INVOLVING CYCLISTS AND JUST
THESE BIG WIDE INTERSECTION
WHICH MAKES IT HARD FOR
CYCLISTS AND RESTAURANTS TO
CROSS.
>> SO SOME OF THE THINGS THAT
WE'RE THINKING ABOUT IS AGAIN
SOME GREEN PIGMENTATION FOR THE
BIKE LANE GETTING THROUGH THE
INTERSECTION MAYBE RIDDER'S
REDUCING THE RADIUS OR TURNING
RADIUS WITH PAINT AND POST AND
HARDEN CENTERLINE AGAIN AT
CERTAIN INTERSECTION APPROACHES
AND THIS INTERSECTION ONLY HAS
I THINK HALF OF THE PEDESTRIAN
SIGNALS WHAT WE CALL PETMEDS
HAVE THE COUNTDOWN FEATURE SO
MAKING SURE THAT THE ENTIRE
INTERSECTION HAS THOSE
COUNTDOWN PATTERN.
>> ALL RIGHT.
ON AND STREET SOME CRASHES
INVOLVING PEDESTRIANS AND
CYCLISTS AND AGAIN THE VOLUME
OF CRASHES IS WHAT KIND
OF DOUBT AT US.
SO THE THINGS THAT WE'RE TRYING
TO DO IS REDUCE THAT EXPOSURE
OF PEDESTRIANS AND INCREASE
VISIBILITY OF CYCLISTS.
AND IN ORDER TO DO THAT WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT DOING PAINT
POSTBANK BELTS AND MARKETING
THE BIKE LANE WITH THAT GREEN
PIGMENTATION.
>> I THINK I'VE USED THE TERM
PAINT POST BUT JUST TO CLARIFY
WHAT I MEAN BY THAT.
SO FOR EXAMPLE, IF WE LOOK AT A
BUMP OUT INSTEAD OF PUTTING A
CONCRETE EXTENSION HERE, THE
PAVEMENT WOULD JUST BE PAINTED
A CERTAIN COLOR THAT WOULD
DIFFERENTIATE IT FROM THE
TRAVELING AND THEN YOU WOULD
HAVE THE VERTICAL ELEMENTS LIKE
DELINEATOR BOLLARDS THAT WOULD
KIND TO BE STUCK IN THE ROAD
THAT WOULD DISCOURAGE VEHICLES
FROM KIND OF ENCROACHING ON
THAT SPACE.
SO IT CREATES A SORT OF VIRTUAL
BUMP WITHOUT CONCRETE
NECESSARILY.
>> ALL RIGHT.
AND SO JUST TO LET YOU KNOW WE
ARE WORKING WITH THE CONSULTANT
FOR TO MOVE THESE PROJECTS
FORWARD.
THEY ARE WORKING ON THE
DESIGNS.
THEY'RE GETTING US QUANTITIES.
WE'RE HELPING TO REFINE THAT.
WE HAVE A MEETING WITH THEM
THIS WEEK AND NEXT WEEK TO KIND
OF MAKE SURE THAT WE'RE MOVING
THIS ALONG.
THEY ARE STARTING THEIR WORK ON
MAJOR STREETS, TRAFFIC CALMING
PROJECT PROCESS AS WE KIND
OF TRANSITION FROM THIS FIRST
ROUND OF QUICK BUILDS, WE HAVE
SOME OTHER DELIVERABLES THEIR
SCOPE AND SOME MAJOR STREET
TRAFFIC COMING IS ONE OF THEM.
I KNOW MANY OF YOU EXPRESSED
INTEREST ON THAT EARLIER WHEN I
TALKED ABOUT THE POLICY AGENDA
SETTING AND THEN WE'RE ALSO
WORKING ON THE PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT INITIATIVES
INITIATIVE.
ONE OF THE THINGS I WILL SAY ON
THE PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT
ENGAGEMENT INITIATIVE IS THAT
IT IS GOING TO BE MORE FOCUSED
ON WHAT WE WOULD CALL AN
INFORMAL APPROACH INSTEAD OF A
CONSULT APPROACH.
AND SO MANY TIMES WE KIND OF GO
PUBLIC WITH A BLANK SLATE AND
SAY, YOU KNOW, TELL US WHAT YOU
THINK, WHAT WE FEEL SINCE THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN IS SO NEW
AND A LOT OF THESE LOCATIONS
BEEN IDENTIFIED IN THE PROCESS
HAS BEEN PRETTY WELL
ESTABLISHED.
WE FEEL LIKE WE HAVE A LOT
OF THE PUBLIC SUPPORT THAT WE
NEED IN TERMS OF HOW WE
IDENTIFY THE LOCATION.
>> SO INSTEAD WHAT WE WANT TO
DO IS WE SAY HEY, WE HEARD YOU
TRANSPORTATION PLAN WAS ADOPTED
AND NOW WE'RE PUTTING IN AN
EMOTION.
HERE'S WHAT'S COMING AND WHY.
RIGHT.
SO A BIT OF AN EXPLAINER WE
WE'RE WORKING ON LIKE YARD
SIGNS TO PUT THEM AT THE
LOCATION TO SAY HEY, WHAT IS
THIS MORE INFORMATION CHECK OUT
THIS A QR CODE AND WE REALLY
WANTED TO KIND TEST IT AND THEN
WHAT WE MIGHT DO AND DON'T HOLD
ME TO THIS BUT THEN THE IDEA IS
AFTER WE PUT IT IN THE GROUND
FOR A WHILE THEN SEEK SOME SOME
FEEDBACK ABOUT HOW WELL DO YOU
THINK THIS IS WORKING AND THEN
THAT WAY THAT WILL HELP US TO
REFINE WHAT WE DID AND MAYBE
SCALE IT TO OTHER PLACES OR IF
WE HAVE TO TWEAK THINGS A
LITTLE BIT IF IT'S NOT HAVING
THE RESULTS THAT WE'RE HOPING
FOR, WE CAN GO BACK AND TWEAK
IT SO SO SO THAT'S KIND OF OUR
APPROACH.
THAT'S WHAT WE'RE WORKING ON
RIGHT NOW AND WE'RE HOPEFUL
THAT THAT APPROACH IS STRATEGY
.
IT'S A LITTLE BIT DIFFERENT
THAN WHAT WE'VE DONE IN THE
PAST BUT HOPEFULLY IT'LL
RESONATE WITH FOLKS THAT THEY
UNDERSTAND THE PROCESS ON HOW
WE GOT HERE AND WE'RE PUTTING
INTO MOTION.
>> SO THAT'S WHAT I WANTED TO
HIGHLIGHT FOR YOU ALL AND THEN
I'M HAPPY TO ENTERTAIN ANY
QUESTIONS YOU HAVE.
THERE'LL BE MORE ON THIS.
WE WILL HAVE AN UPCOMING
MEETING HOPEFULLY BY THE NEXT
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
MEETING.
I CAN COME BACK WITH SOMETHING
A LITTLE BIT MORE REFINED AND
AS YOU KNOW ABOUT JULIE AND
BRETT ARE KIND OF INTEGRATED
INTO THAT PROCESS AS WELL.
SO THEY CAN KICK ME UNDER THE
TABLE IF I MISREPRESENT
ANYTHING QUESTIONS, COMMENTS
ERIKA JUST EXCITED TO SEE THESE
ROLLING OUT.
THIS IS THE ONE ALONG MAPLE
ROAD THAT'S BEEN ASKED FOR AND
IN THE FIFTH WARD.
SO I'M EXCITED AND I THINK THE
COMMUNICATION STRATEGY MAKES
SENSE IN TERMS OF JUST LETTING
LETTING THE COMMUNITY KNOW THAT
THIS IS A CONTINUATION OF THE
PLANNING PROCESS AND HELPING
THEM UNDERSTAND I GUESS ONE
AROUND THIS AND THIS MAY BE TOO
LABOR INTENSIVE.
SO I'M JUST KIND OF CURIOUS IF
STAFF IS THINKING ABOUT DOING
THIS OR IF THIS MIGHT BE
SOMETHING THAT FOLKS IN THE
COMMUNITY MIGHT NEED TO BE
THINKING ABOUT JUST LITTLE MINI
VIDEO SEGMENTS THAT KIND
OF HAVE YOU KNOW, MAYBE
SOMEBODY USING USING AN
INTERSECTION BEFORE SOMETHING
IS BEING USED BEFORE THE QUICK
BUILD IS THERE AND THEN
DEMONSTRATING THE QUICK BUILD
AFTERWARDS SO THAT THEY CAN BE
SHARED A LITTLE BIT ON SOCIAL
MEDIA OR ALSO JUST HELP TO
EXPLAIN WHAT'S GOING ON FOR
FOLKS WHO MISSED MEETING AND
THEN IF THAT'S SOMETHING THAT'S
ANTICIPATED OR YEAH, I'LL TAKE
THAT BACK TO THE TEAM WHEN WE
MEET SO I DON'T KNOW IF WE HAVE
TO ANTICIPATE VIDEOS BUT VIDEOS
ARE A LOT EASIER TO PRODUCE
NOW.
I MEAN IT MAY NOT BE A HIGH
PRODUCTION VIRTUAL REALITY
THING BUT WE COULD EVEN JUST
NARRATE A QUICK LITTLE SLIDE
BEFORE AND AFTER.
>> SO I I WILL TAKE YOUR
SUGGESTION TO THE TEAM.
I THINK IT'S A GOOD ONE.
I FEEL LIKE IT MIGHT ALSO BE
HELPFUL.
ERIKA, TO SORT OF LIKE HELP
YOUR FELLOW COUNCIL MEMBERS
SORT OF GIRD THEMSELVES A
LITTLE BIT BECAUSE WHEN
SOMETHING LIKE THIS HAPPENS
THERE'S ALWAYS OUTCRY LIKE
THERE'S OH PEOPLE ARE ALWAYS
GOING TO OBJECT LOUDLY AND I
THINK IT'S GOING TO BE SO
IMPORTANT FOR THE CITY TO LIKE
HOLD OUR GROUND AND SAY NO,
THIS PEOPLE ARE GETTING HURT
HERE WE HAVE TO WE HAVE TO DO
THIS.
SO JUST THINKING ABOUT IF THERE
ARE WAYS TO SORT OF SMOOTH NOT
HAVING TO BE AN APPROVAL THING
AT THE SAME TIME PREPARING
SEEMS A LITTLE BIT LIKE
WITHSTAND THE INEVITABLE MAYBE
THERE WON'T BE ONSLAUGHT THAT
WOULD BE AMAZING.
>> BUT YOU KNOW, CHANGE IS
DIFFICULT AND WE GET TO HEAR
ABOUT IT WHEN IT HAPPENS.
PERSONALLY I ADVOCATE FOR THE
RULING OUT A COUPLE OF PROJECTS
AND THEN A REALLY BIG PROJECT
WHERE WE GET LIKE A LOT
OF FEEDBACK ON THE BIG PROJECT
WITH THE OTHER SMALLER ONES
FIRST NATIONALLY AND THEN WE
ROLLED OUT MAIN STREET AND MY
GOODNESS THAT THAT CHANGED THE
CONVERSATION.
NOW.
NO, BUT I DO THINK I POINT
TAKEN.
I THINK I COULD DEFINITELY LET
FOLKS AT COUNCIL KNOW THAT THIS
IS COMING FORWARD AND ALERT.
YOU KNOW, ALERT THEM THAT THESE
DIFFERENT PROJECTS AND HELP
SHARE SO THAT THEY THEY KNOW
WHAT'S COMING.
>> THANK YOU.
I'M EXCITED ABOUT SOME SOME
CRITICAL ELEMENTS ON PACARD.
YOU KNOW, I WANT TO IDENTIFY
THE WHOLE THING BUT I'LL TAKE
I'LL TAKE A COUPLE OF BLOCKS IF
I CAN GET IT.
ALL RIGHT.
WELL WE CAN KEEP MOVING.
THAT WAS ACTUALLY THE LAST LIKE
SORT OF FULL ITEM.
NOW WE'VE GOT LIKE OUR STANDARD
STUFF SO MOVING ON TO STAFF
REPORT AND UPDATES WHICH IS
ALSO RAYMENT AGAIN.
>> YEAH, I'LL GO AHEAD AND TAKE
THAT AGAIN.
>> SO AS IS ALWAYS THE CASE
I'LL JUST KIND OF HIGHLIGHT
WHAT'S CHANGED FROM MONTH TO
MONTH.
>> YOU KNOW IT'S ALWAYS
INTERESTING THE JANUARY REPORT
IS REALLY BIG BECAUSE WE PUT A
WHOLE BUNCH OF PROJECTS IN AND
THEN THERE'S A LOT OF WORK
THAT'S GOING ON BEHIND THE
SCENES WITH DESIGN AND LETTING
AND ALL THAT SORT OF THING AND
DID SO THIS IS A PRETTY SHORT
REPORT BECAUSE WE'RE KIND OF IN
THE DOLDRUMS BEFORE THE SUMMER
CONSTRUCTION SEASON KICKS OFF
AND SO IT'S ONLY A COUPLE
OF PAGES LONG BUT ANNUAL STREET
RESURFACING PROJECT THERE ISN'T
A LOT OF NEW UPDATE THERE.
JUST CHECK THE PROJECT WEBSITE
FOR UPDATES CYO CHURCH ROAD THE
ONLY BIG CHANGE THERE IS THE
SCHEDULE CHANGED MOVE TO SUMMER
OF TWENTY TWENTY TWO I THINK
BEFORE IT HIT THE SPRING
OF TWENTY TWENTY TWO SO JUST
THAT PLATT ROAD ER EARHART WAS
PREVIOUSLY LISTED AS A SINGLE
PROJECT BUT NOW IT'S BROKEN OUT
AS TWO DISCRETE PROJECTS SO
THEY'RE LABELED SEPARATELY HERE
THAT INCLUDES RESURFACING WATER
MAIN REPLACEMENT WORK AND
PEDESTRIAN IMPROVEMENTS THAT
WILL BE THIS SUMMER.
ER HART IS KIND OF A SISTER
PROJECT BETWEEN GATTI'S AND
GREENHILLS.
IT ALSO INCLUDES RESURFACING IN
ADDITION TO BIKE LANE IT HAS
BEEN DELAYED DUE TO
REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO THE
FEDERAL FUNDING BUT IS STILL
EXPECTED TO BE CONSTRUCTED
LATER THIS YEAR SUMMER FALL
OF TWENTY TWENTY TWO MEDICAL
CENTER DRIVE BRIDGE THE
LANGUAGE THE SAME NICK I WASN'T
SURE IF THERE'S ANY OTHER
UPDATE TO GIVE ON THIS.
WE WEREN'T SURE IF THERE WERE
MAYBE SOME LATE BREAKING
DEVELOPMENT BUT IF THERE ARE
AND THERE'S THERE'S NO NO BUT
I'M STILL WAITING FOR MORE
INFORMATION SO NOTHING MORE TO
SHARE IN.
ALL RIGHT.
ON THREE LATE IMPLEMENTATION WE
DID COMPLETE A HANDFUL
OF STREETLIGHT INSTALLS IN THE
LAST MONTH OR SO SO WE HAVE NEW
LIGHTS ON BAYLIS SEVEN SCHOOL S
MAIN AND HOOVER S MAIN AND
DAVIS BARTON AT CHANNELER
LONGSHORE AND NORTH SIDE AND
END STATE STREET AND THE
MICHIGAN UNION AND WE'RE
CURRENTLY TRACKING OUTAGES.
HE HAS ABOUT THREE HUNDRED AND
TEN THAT THEY'VE ADDRESSED SO
FAR THIS YEAR.
ONE OF THE THING I WILL NOTE ON
STREETLIGHT OUTAGES THE WE HAVE
A CONSULTANT THAT IS DOING
PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE ON A LOT
OF OUR STREET LIGHTS WHERE
THEY'RE GOING IN AND REPLACING
STREETLIGHTS THAT ARE SOON TO
BE FUNCTIONALLY OBSOLETE OR IN
DANGER OF FALLING DOWN THAT
SORT OF THING.
SO SOME OF THE STREETLIGHTS
THAT OUTAGES THAT ARE OCCURRING
ARE ACTUALLY INDUCED THAT WE
TURN THEM OFF BECAUSE WE'RE
REPLACING THEM.
SO WE ARE GETTING KIND OF AN
UPTICK IN SOME OF THESE OUTAGE
REPORTS BECAUSE IT'S RELATED TO
SOME OF THE MAINTENANCE WORK
THAT'S HAPPENING.
SO IT'S NOT GREAT NEWS BUT IT'S
ALSO GOOD NEWS BECAUSE THEN
THEY WILL BE IN TIP TOP SHAPE
WHEN THEY GET BACK ONLINE.
AND KORBY IS THE CONSULTANT
HELPING US WITH AND THEN THE
LAST UPDATE I HAVE WHICH I'VE
ALREADY MENTIONED TO YOU IS THE
AMERICAN RESCUE PLAN ACT
FUNDING OR ARPA COUNCIL DID
MAKE A DECISION ON THAT EARLIER
THIS MONTH AND IT DID INCLUDE
THAT TWO DOLLARS BILLION FOR
VISION ZERO PLAN
IMPLEMENTATION.
YOU MAY RECALL THAT YOU'VE
HEARD ME PRESENT IN THE PAST ON
MILLER CATHERINE
CYCLE TRACK OR
BIKE FACIL SIGNATURE BIKE
FACILITY THAT WOULD RUN THE
WHOLE LENGTH OF MILLER
CATHERINE KIND OF BUILDS OFF
THE DENHA PROJECT THAT'S
HAPPENING THE SUMMER THAT
PROJECT DID NOT GET CHOSEN.
IT DID NOT SCORE PARTICULARLY
WELL IN THE PUBLIC SURVEYS SO
THAT ONE KIND OF GOT CUT BUT WE
ARE STILL THROWING THAT OUT
THERE TO OTHER FOLKS TO SEE IF
THERE'S INTEREST IN FUNDING IT.
BUT FEDERAL DESIGNATIONS AND
OTHERS SO IT'S BY NO MEANS
DEAD .
WE'RE STILL TRYING TO FIND SOME
OTHER FUNDING SOURCES.
SO KEEP YOUR FINGERS CROSSED.
HOPEFULLY WE CAN GET SOME
FUNDING TO MOVE THIS PROJECT
FORWARD AS WELL AND THOSE ARE
ALL THE UPDATES I WANTED TO
GIVE TONIGHT.
I'M HAPPY TO TAKE ANY QUESTIONS
YOU MIGHT HAVE.
THANKS
.
ALL RIGHT.
NOT SEEING ANY QUESTIONS.
SO WE ARE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF , UH,
REPORTS STARTING WITH THE
LIAISON REPORTS AND I THINK
YEAH.
WELL THANKS.
I JUST WANTED TO TALK PARKING
YEAH.
PLANNING COMMISSION I WANT TO
I JUST WANTED TO TALK PARKING
SAY ABOUT TWO WEEKS AGO DID
PLANNING COMMISSION I WANT TO
VOTE TO RECOMMEND THE
SAY ABOUT TWO WEEKS AGO DID
ELIMINATION MINIMUMS.
VOTE TO RECOMMEND THE
IT IS ACTUALLY GOING TO COME
ELIMINATION MINIMUMS.
BACK TO PLANNING COMMISSION ON
IT IS ACTUALLY GOING TO COME
MAY 17.
BACK TO PLANNING COMMISSION ON
THERE WAS SOME CONFUSION AND
MAY 17.
SOME CONTRADICTIONS ABOUT THAT
THERE WAS SOME CONFUSION AND
MINIMUM AND IN SPECIFIC AREA.
SOME CONTRADICTIONS ABOUT THAT
SO THERE'S A LITTLE BIT
MINIMUM AND IN SPECIFIC AREA.
OF CONFLICT WITH DC BECAUSE
SO THERE'S A LITTLE BIT
THERE'S A LOT DIFFERENT
OF CONFLICT WITH DC BECAUSE
SECTIONS LIKE DAYCARE WITH
THERE'S A LOT DIFFERENT
MINIMUMS, ET CETERA.
SECTIONS LIKE DAYCARE WITH
SO AS WE SQUABBLE FURTHER SO I
MINIMUMS, ET CETERA.
IMAGINE IT'S GOING TO GO TO
SO AS WE SQUABBLE FURTHER SO I
COUNCIL IN A LITTLE OVER A
IMAGINE IT'S GOING TO GO TO
MONTH BUT I KNOW THAT IT HAS
COUNCIL IN A LITTLE OVER A
PRETTY MUCH UNANIMOUS SUPPORT
MONTH BUT I KNOW THAT IT HAS
PLANNING COMMISSION SO I JUST
PRETTY MUCH UNANIMOUS SUPPORT
WANTED TO GIVE THAT HEADS.
PLANNING COMMISSION SO I JUST
>> THAT'S ABOUT THE THANK YOU
WANTED TO GIVE THAT HEADS.
BRIAN JUST WANTED TO LED
>> THAT'S ABOUT THE THANK YOU
COMMISSION MEMBERS KNOW THAT
BRIAN JUST WANTED TO LED
OUR BOARD IS VOTING IS IS AND
COMMISSION MEMBERS KNOW THAT
IS EXPECTED TO VOTE TOMORROW
OUR BOARD IS VOTING IS IS AND
NIGHT ON PUTTING A VILLAGE ON
IS EXPECTED TO VOTE TOMORROW
THE BALLOT IN AUGUST.
NIGHT ON PUTTING A VILLAGE ON
WE ARE INVITING PUBLIC COMMENT
THE BALLOT IN AUGUST.
AND EXPECT THERE TO BE A A
WE ARE INVITING PUBLIC COMMENT
HEALTHY DEBATE ON A MILLAGE BUT
AND EXPECT THERE TO BE A A
IT DOES IF YOU GO AND LOOK AT
HEALTHY DEBATE ON A MILLAGE BUT
THE VILLAGE PLAN, A LOT OF WHAT
IT DOES IF YOU GO AND LOOK AT
WE TALKED ABOUT TONIGHT
THE VILLAGE PLAN, A LOT OF WHAT
INCREASING FREQUENCY AND
WE TALKED ABOUT TONIGHT
INCREASING HOURS OF SERVICE AND
INCREASING FREQUENCY AND
HAVING BETTER NITRITE SERVICE
INCREASING HOURS OF SERVICE AND
ALL OF THOSE KINDS OF THINGS
HAVING BETTER NITRITE SERVICE
ARE IN THAT PLAN AS PART OF IT.
ALL OF THOSE KINDS OF THINGS
SO NEXT MONTH I'LL BE ABLE TO
ARE IN THAT PLAN AS PART OF IT.
REPORT WHETHER WE'RE GOING ON
SO NEXT MONTH I'LL BE ABLE TO
AN AUGUST OR NOT.
REPORT WHETHER WE'RE GOING ON
THANK YOU, LIEUTENANT SCHERBA.
AN AUGUST OR NOT.
I HAVE IN MY NOTES THAT YOU
THANK YOU, LIEUTENANT SCHERBA.
WERE GOING TO BE GIVING AN
I HAVE IN MY NOTES THAT YOU
UPDATE ABOUT A RECENT CRASH.
WERE GOING TO BE GIVING AN
>> THANKS, MIKE.
UPDATE ABOUT A RECENT CRASH.
I JUST WANT TO GIVE THE
>> THANKS, MIKE.
COMMISSION JUST A QUICK UPDATE
I JUST WANT TO GIVE THE
ON A CRASH WE HAD BACK ON MARCH
COMMISSION JUST A QUICK UPDATE
30TH.
ON A CRASH WE HAD BACK ON MARCH
SO IT OCCURRED ON DIDN'T BRING
30TH.
MY NOTES.
SO IT OCCURRED ON DIDN'T BRING
IT WAS BETWEEN FOUR THIRTY AND
MY NOTES.
FIVE THIRTY IN THE MORNING ON
IT WAS BETWEEN FOUR THIRTY AND
WEST STADIUM NEAR FALER.
FIVE THIRTY IN THE MORNING ON
WDM KIND OF RUNS NORTH AND
WEST STADIUM NEAR FALER.
SOUTH AT THAT POINT IT WAS A
WDM KIND OF RUNS NORTH AND
SMALL SUV WHO WAS IN THE RIGHT
SOUTH AT THAT POINT IT WAS A
LANE GOING EASTBOUND BUT IT WAS
SMALL SUV WHO WAS IN THE RIGHT
ESSENTIALLY IT'S LIKE I SAID
LANE GOING EASTBOUND BUT IT WAS
SOUTHEAST AT THAT POINT AND
ESSENTIALLY IT'S LIKE I SAID
THERE WAS A CYCLIST WHO WAS
SOUTHEAST AT THAT POINT AND
CROSSING FROM EAST TO WEST.
THERE WAS A CYCLIST WHO WAS
IT WOULD HAVE BEEN JUST NORTH
CROSSING FROM EAST TO WEST.
OF THE CROSSWALK.
IT WOULD HAVE BEEN JUST NORTH
THERE IS A ILLUMINATED
OF THE CROSSWALK.
CROSSWALK RIGHT THERE JUST
THERE IS A ILLUMINATED
SOUTH OF TAYLOR.
CROSSWALK RIGHT THERE JUST
BUT THE CYCLIST DIDN'T USE THAT
SOUTH OF TAYLOR.
DIDN'T HIT THE BUTTON TO
BUT THE CYCLIST DIDN'T USE THAT
ILLUMINATE THE CROSSWALK BUT
DIDN'T HIT THE BUTTON TO
DID CROSS THE ROAD JUST NORTH
ILLUMINATE THE CROSSWALK BUT
OF THAT RIDING NOT NOT WALKING
DID CROSS THE ROAD JUST NORTH
THE BIKE AND WAS STRUCK BY THAT
OF THAT RIDING NOT NOT WALKING
SMALL SUV IMPACT KNOCKED
THE BIKE AND WAS STRUCK BY THAT
CYCLISTS OFF THE BIKE AND ABOUT
SMALL SUV IMPACT KNOCKED
FORTY FEET FORWARD OUR
CYCLISTS OFF THE BIKE AND ABOUT
INVESTIGATORS ARE STILL LOOKING
FORTY FEET FORWARD OUR
INTO IT.
INVESTIGATORS ARE STILL LOOKING
IT'S ABOUT AN EIGHTY ONE YEAR
INTO IT.
OLD MAN.
IT'S ABOUT AN EIGHTY ONE YEAR
HE DID DIE FROM THE INJURIES
OLD MAN.
THAT MORNING AND IT'S AGAIN
HE DID DIE FROM THE INJURIES
STILL BEING INVESTIGATED AS IS
THAT MORNING AND IT'S AGAIN
OUR TYPICAL PROTOCOL.
STILL BEING INVESTIGATED AS IS
ONCE THE INVESTIGATION IS
OUR TYPICAL PROTOCOL.
COMPLETE WE DO SEND THEM TO THE
ONCE THE INVESTIGATION IS
PROSECUTOR FOR REVIEW AND THIS
COMPLETE WE DO SEND THEM TO THE
INSTANCE I DON'T THINK THEY
PROSECUTOR FOR REVIEW AND THIS
WOULD BE CHARGED AUTHORIZED BUT
INSTANCE I DON'T THINK THEY
STRONG.
WOULD BE CHARGED AUTHORIZED BUT
THAT'S NOT UP TO ME.
STRONG.
NO, IT APPEARED THAT AGAIN IT
THAT'S NOT UP TO ME.
WAS A IT WAS IN THE DARK.
NO, IT APPEARED THAT AGAIN IT
THE CYCLIST WAS IN DARK
WAS A IT WAS IN THE DARK.
CLOTHING WITH A HOOD ON WITH A
THE CYCLIST WAS IN DARK
RED BICYCLE CROSSING OUTSIDE
CLOTHING WITH A HOOD ON WITH A
OF THE CROSSWALK AND AND WAS
RED BICYCLE CROSSING OUTSIDE
STRUCK.
OF THE CROSSWALK AND AND WAS
I CAN I CAN ANSWER ANY
STRUCK.
QUESTIONS IF ANYONE HAS ANY
I CAN I CAN ANSWER ANY
DOUBT THAT INCIDENT ERIKA,
QUESTIONS IF ANYONE HAS ANY
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR PROVIDING
DOUBT THAT INCIDENT ERIKA,
THE UPDATE ON THAT LOCATION.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR PROVIDING
DO YOU MIND IF I CONNECT YOU
THE UPDATE ON THAT LOCATION.
WITH SOMEBODY IN THE COMMUNITY
DO YOU MIND IF I CONNECT YOU
WHO'S BEEN ORGANIZATIONS AND
WITH SOMEBODY IN THE COMMUNITY
WORKING TO PUT UP A GHOST BIKE
WHO'S BEEN ORGANIZATIONS AND
AND SO THEY'VE BEEN JUST TRYING
WORKING TO PUT UP A GHOST BIKE
TO FIGURE OUT EXACTLY WHAT THE
AND SO THEY'VE BEEN JUST TRYING
LOCATION WAS.
TO FIGURE OUT EXACTLY WHAT THE
YOU DESCRIBED IT PRETTY WELL
LOCATION WAS.
BUT THEY MIGHT HAVE SOME FOLLOW
YOU DESCRIBED IT PRETTY WELL
UP QUESTIONS AROUND THAT AND IT
BUT THEY MIGHT HAVE SOME FOLLOW
GOES BACK YOU CAN PASS MY INFO
UP QUESTIONS AROUND THAT AND IT
ON ANYBODY ABOUT THAT.
GOES BACK YOU CAN PASS MY INFO
YOU'RE OK.
ON ANYBODY ABOUT THAT.
THANKS SO MUCH.
YOU'RE OK.
THANK YOU.
THANKS SO MUCH.
OTHER QUESTIONS.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
OTHER QUESTIONS.
YEAH.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU FOR THAT UPDATE.
YEAH.
>> IT'S A TRAGEDY ALWAYS EVERY
THANK YOU FOR THAT UPDATE.
TIME ARE THERE OTHER LEADS ON
>> IT'S A TRAGEDY ALWAYS EVERY
REPORTS
OK.
OH ERIKA ASTRON THINK IT HASN'T
BEEN REPORTED ON I GUESS
COUNCIL DID ADOPT THE TRANSIT
ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT ON THAT
STATE SO THAT WAS SOMETHING
THAT CAME THROUGH FROM THE
COMMISSION WAS WAS ADOPTED SO
THAT THAT NEW DESIGNATION AND I
THINK EVERYTHING ELSE IS GOING
TO REPORT ON THE MILLAGE
ENCOURAGE FOLKS TO PROVIDE
FEEDBACK TO TO THE RIDE
TOMORROW NIGHT TO THE BOARD.
I KNOW THEY'RE GOING TO BE
LOOKING FOR FEEDBACK ON THAT
AND ALSO MY UNDERSTANDING IS
THAT THE ONE THERE'S BEEN AN
EXTENSION OF THE FEEDBACK ON
THE LONG RANGE PLAN AS WELL.
BUT THAT'S BEEN EXTENDED A
LITTLE BIT.
SO WE THINK THAT WAS ALL THAT
CAME OUT OF WHAT'S THANKS.
>> THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
SO WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
GENERAL COMMISSION MEMBER
COMMUNICATIONS AND I WANTED TO
START BY ACKNOWLEDGING THAT
THIS IS THE LAST MEETING FOR
TWO OF OUR COMMISSIONERS FOR
BOTH O'REILLY AND JIM ARE
MOVING OFF OF THE COMMISSION.
AND SO I JUST WANTED TO TAKE A
MOMENT AND THANK YOU BOTH FOR
YOUR SERVICE TO THIS COMMISSION
AND YOUR PARTICIPATION IN THE
COMMITTEE'S.
IT'S BEEN WONDERFUL TO HAVE
BOTH OF YOUR PERSPECTIVES ON
THE COMMISSION AND WE WILL MISS
YOU.
AND ALSO I THINK THERE'S LIKE
CONGRATULATIONS IN ORDER TO I
THINK A REALLY BECAUSE YOU'RE
GRADUATING IN JUNE BECAUSE YOUR
BUSINESS IS DOING SO WELL THAT
YOU DON'T HAVE TIME FOR US
ANYMORE.
BUT THANK YOU.
THANK YOU BOTH FOR YOUR TIME.
I DON'T KNOW IF YOU HAVE WANTED
TO SAY ANYTHING.
YOU DON'T HAVE TO SAY ANYTHING
TO GIVE YOU LIKE YOU CAN IF YOU
WANT.
>> YEAH I'LL SAY SOMETHING GO.
THAT'S BEEN FUN.
I'VE ENJOYED WORKING WITH
EVERYONE IN THE LIMITED
CAPACITY THAT I'VE BEEN ABLE TO
PARTICIPATE.
YEAH AND THANK YOU.
ALLOWING ME TO YOU KNOW BE HERE
AND I THINK EVERYONE AND DOING
A GREAT JOB AND WE ARE ALL
GREAT AGAIN WE HEAR IT FROM THE
COMMUNITY GO YEAH YEAH.
THANK THANK YOU.
AND I ALSO WANT TO SAY A BIG
THANKS.
IT WAS IT'S BEEN THE JOY OF A
LEARNING EXPERIENCE LIKE BEING
HERE WITH ALL THEY REALLY HAVE
LEARNED A LOT FROM THE
PERSPECTIVE THAT EACH OF YOU
BRING IN JUST THE DIFFERENT
INVESTMENT AND ALSO WILL NEVER
FORGET THE PASSIONATE
CONVERSATIONS WE HAD ON SNOW
REMOVAL.
I REALLY LEARNED SO MUCH FROM
EACH OF YOU AND THAT IS ONE
OF THE INSTANCES THAT REALLY
STUCK OUT TO ME AND I WILL MISS
MONTHLY MEETINGS BUT I LOOK
FORWARD TO CONNECTING WITH YOU
ALL OUTSIDE OF THAT TO THEM.
THANK YOU.
THIS ALSO MEANS THAT THERE WILL
BE OPENINGS ON THE COMMISSION.
SO IF YOU HAVE PEOPLE YOU KNOW
WHO YOU THINK WOULD BE GOOD FOR
THE COMMISSION, PLEASE FEEL
FREE TO SEND THEM MY WAY.
I HAVE AT THIS POINT A STANDARD
SPIEL THAT I'VE BEEN SENDING TO
FOLKS AND I'M HAPPY TO PASS
THAT ALONG TO ANYONE WHO IS
TRYING TO RECRUIT SOMEONE TO
COME AND JOIN US.
SO YEAH, SO THAT WAS THAT WAS
MY THING.
I DON'T KNOW IF THERE ARE OTHER
COMMISSIONER COMMUNICATIONS.
ALL RIGHT.
LOOKS LIKE JIM'S CAT IS COMING
IN TO SAY SOMETHING TO US.
AWESOME.
SO NEXT UP IS CALL FOR AGENDA
ITEMS.
SOUNDS LIKE WE'VE GOT A COUPLE
THAT CAME OUT OF OUR EARLIER
DISCUSSION THIS EVENING THAT WE
WANT TO BRING BRING BACK FOUR
AGENDA ITEMS IF ANYONE HAS
ANYTHING ELSE THAT THEY'D LIKE
US TO DISCUSS IN THE COMING
MONTHS, NOW'S A GOOD TIME TO
SUGGEST IT.
>> YEAH.
SEE WHAT I CAN DO.
LET ME JUST TELL YOU WHAT'S ON
THE DOCKET TENTATIVELY SO FIRST
WE DO ANTICIPATE BRINGING THE
MAIN STREET RECONFIGURATION
BACK TO YOU.
WE ARE FINALIZING THE MEMO
RIGHT NOW AND KIND OF CRUNCHING
THE NUMBERS TO MAKE SURE
EVERYTHING LOOKS GOOD ON IT.
BUT WILL BE COMING BACK TO YOU
WITH OUR PROPOSAL ON
THAT WHICH
WILL THEN BE FORWARDED ON CITY
COUNCIL AS WELL.
SIMILARLY, YOU'VE HEARD US TALK
ABOUT THE S THE VISION CYCLE
TRACK.
THE IDEA IS THAT THE DENHA
PROJECT AND THE PACARD THERE'S
AN OPPORTUNITY TO POSSIBLY
EXTEND THAT DOWN TO HOOVER.
AND SO WE HAVE AGAIN WE DID
INPUT ON THAT AS WELL AS MAIN
STREET.
WE'RE WORKING ON A MEMO THAT
ONE WILL REQUIRE ACTION OF THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION THAT
YOU HEARD ME SAY THIS BEFORE
BECAUSE IT WOULD REQUIRE
REMOVAL OF PARKING AND REMOVAL.
PARKING IS A COUNCIL ACTION
WHICH WE WOULD BE SOLICITING
FEEDBACK AND RECOMMENDATION
FROM THIS COMMISSION ON.
SO WE THINK BOTH OF THOSE WILL
BE UP.
THE OTHER THING THAT THE OFFICE
OF SUSTAINABILITY AND
INNOVATION HAS ASKED TO GIVE A
PRESENTATION ON THE SUSTAINABLE
ENERGY UTILITY THIS IS ONE
OF THE POLICY ITEMS THAT YOU
ALL IDENTIFIED IN THE LOCAL
AGENDA.
AND SO MISSY AND HER TEAM ARE
WORKING ON THAT STRATEGY.
SO THEY JUST RELEASED A MEMO
THIS WEEK INCLUDING YOUR PACKET
AND TIMMY BARR WHO IS ON THIS
TEAM IS EXPECTED TO JOIN US
THEN THE OTHER KIND
OF TENTATIVE ONES ARE THIS TIME
FOR YEARS WHEN HIGHWAY SAFETY
IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS OR WHAT WE
SOMETIMES CALL H THOSE GRANTS
ARE DUE.
AND SO AGAIN, THESE ARE KIND
OF DATA DRIVEN.
WE TRY TO LOOK AT AREAS WHERE
THERE ARE A CRASH PATTERNS AND
PROVEN COUNTERMEASURES THAT WE
CAN IMPLEMENT THIS MIGHT BE
COME DOWN PEDESTRIAN HEADS OR
THINGS LIKE THAT.
SO I SUSPECT WILL BE COMING TO
YOU WITH WHAT OUR PROPOSAL WILL
BE THERE AND THEN IF WE HAVE A
VISION ZERO IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
MEETING WILL COME BACK WITH AN
UPDATE ON THAT TOO.
>> AND THEN MOLLY, TO YOUR
SUGGESTION AND I THINK IT CAME
FROM BOTH WHAT YOU WERE SAYING
AND WHAT MEGAN WAS SAYING IS
SINCE I WILL KIND
OF OPPORTUNISTICALLY TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF THEIR PRESENCE,
I'LL PROBABLY HAVE ONE OR TWO
ENGINEERS HERE.
SO IF YOU ALL DO WISH TO HAVE A
DISCUSSION ABOUT EITHER NO TURN
ON RED AND OR HEAD RECALL A BIG
BUTTON HAD BIG BUTTON IT MIGHT
BE A GOOD TIME TO DO SO AND SO
I'LL HAVE PEOPLE SMARTER OF ME
HERE AT THE MEETING ANYWAY.
>> SO LET'S DO IT.
THAT'S OK.
>> I'VE ALREADY WARNED THEM SO
THEY'RE LINED UP FOR IT.
>> JULIE YEAH.
SINCE THE ON TIME TRANSIT ISSUE
RANKED PRETTY HIGH I'D LIKE TO
FOLLOW UP ON THAT SOMEHOW.
SO I THINK IT LOOKS LIKE FOUR
YEARS AGO THE FIRST TIME I
HEARD IN ONE OF THE
PRESENTATIONS FROM THE STAFF
THAT IT'S POSSIBLE TO
PRIORITIZE THE SIGNALS SO THAT
THE BUSSES COULD GO THROUGH AND
I WAS LIKE OH OK.
SO MAYBE THAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN
SOON AND IT'S BEEN YEARS AND
NOTHING HAS HAPPENED.
AND WHAT BRIAN SAID ABOUT
NEEDING CERTAIN TYPES OF DATA
IN ORDER TO MAKE THAT WORK AND
ALSO THE BUSTLING IDEA WORK
MAKE MAKES A LOT OF SENSE AS TO
WHY MAYBE IT HASN'T HAPPENED
AND I WONDERED IF IF WE COULD
HAVE A DISCUSSION ABOUT OR A
PRESENTATION FROM STAFF ABOUT
WHAT KIND OF DATA WOULD BE
NEEDED IF THAT CAN BE COLLECTED
SO THAT WE COULD MAKE SOME DATA
DRIVEN DECISIONS ABOUT THAT OR
RECOMMENDATIONS.
>> WE DON'T MAKE DECISIONS.
WE JUST MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS
RIGHT?
>> YEAH, THAT SOUNDS GREAT.
I'D LOVE TO SEE THAT ON A
FUTURE AGENDA.
YEAH.
AND I WILL SAY YOU MAY OR MAY
NOT KNOW THAT WE MAY HAVE
REPORTED ON IT BRIEFLY IN THE
PAST BUT THE RIDE IS ACTUALLY
CONDUCTING A THEY JUST FINISHED
A FELICITATION BRIAN I YOUR
CAMERAS OFF I DON'T WANT TO
STEAL YOUR THUNDER BUT MAYBE
I'LL TURN IT OVER TO YOU AND
LET YOU SAY WHAT I THINK I WAS
ABOUT TO SAY.
WE ARE WE ARE WE I'M SORRY WE
DID JUST HIRE A CONSULTANT TO
HELP US WITH THAT.
IT DOES REQUIRE COORDINATION
OF SYSTEM THAT WE USE WITH THE
CITY'S SIGNATURE PRIORITY
SYSTEM AND THE THINGS LIKE
THAT.
YOU REPORTED ABOUT WITH
DIRECTING YOU ACROSS CAMPUS
INSTEAD OF TO THE DC LIKE THOSE
ARE SOME OF THE DATA POINTS
THAT NEED TO BE ACCURATE
BECAUSE IT THAT THAT'S THE
INFORMATION THAT WOULD FEED
INTO THE SIGNAL PRIORITY TO SAY
THAT THERE'S A BUS COMING SO
WORKING OUT ALL OF THOSE KINKS
IS IMPORTANT TO GET IT TO WORK.
BUT I'M EXCITED TO SAY THAT
WE'RE WE'RE ONE STEP CLOSER TO
TO GETTING IT UNDERWAY.
>> YEAH.
ONE OF THE REASONS WHY I WANT
TO BRING TO BRING THAT UP AND
THANK YOU BRIAN IS I THINK YOU
KNOW THAT PROJECT IS JUST
KICKING OFF SO MAYBE NEXT MONTH
MIGHT BE A LITTLE PREMATURE TO
HAVE SOMETHING REALLY CONCRETE
TO SHARE WITH THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION.
SO I I MIGHT SUGGEST THAT IF
BRIAN AGREES TO LET IT DEVELOP
A LITTLE BIT AND THEN ONCE SOME
RECOMMENDATIONS START TO
FORMULATE OUT OF THAT EFFORT
THAT THEN WE CAN GO AND YOU
KNOW, THE RIGHT HAS BEEN VERY
GRACIOUS, LOU, ON OUR TEAM HAS
BEEN YOU INVITED TO PARTICIPATE
IN THAT PROCESS SO WE'RE KIND
OF IN LOCK STEP WITH THE RIGHT
ON THAT.
SO SO I ONLY SAY THAT THAT THE
TIMING AND SEQUENCING MIGHT
JUST BE SUCH LET'S WAIT TILL WE
GET ENOUGH INFORMATION TO MAKE
IT A MEANINGFUL DISCUSSION FOR
YOU ON.
YEAH I THINK THAT MAKES SENSE.
ALL RIGHT.
WELL I THINK LET'S SEE FIRST
OF ALL THE NEXT MEETING IS
SCHEDULED FOR WEDNESDAY, MAY
18TH, 7:00 P.M. IT WILL BE A
VIRTUAL MEETING AND IF THERE
ARE NO OBJECTIONS WE WILL
ADJOURN TODAY'S MEETING.
ALL RIGHT.
WE'RE ADJOURNED.
>> THANKS SO MUCH EVERYONE.
THANKS.
GOOD NIGHT.
EVERYBODY.